Title: Faster Visuomotor Policy Learning on Action Manifolds via Riemannian MeanFlow

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.30127v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 01:43:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Faster Visuomotor Policy Learning on Action Manifolds via Riemannian MeanFlow 

S. Talha Bukhari, Austin Garrett, Yi Wei, Ruiqi Ni, Zachary Kingston, and Aniket Bera 

Abstract — Visuomotor policies learn a direct map from raw sensory observations to robot action sequences. Policies based on Diffusion and Flow Matching capture the multimodal distribution over action sequences in an end-to-end manner. This expressivity comes at the cost of multi-step numerical integration of the learned vector field for action generation, which can be expensive and time-consuming, impeding fast control rates required in robotics applications. Furthermore, robot action sequences are usually defined on a smooth, differ-entiable manifold, requiring that the learned policy respects the intrinsic geometry of the robot’s action space. Here, we present Riemannian MeanFlow Policy (RMFP), which learns the con-ditioned flow map of the probability path on the robot action manifold. Our formulation employs a flow map consistency objective grounded in the data by a Riemannian Conditional Flow Matching anchor. The flow map consistency condition is stable to train and constrains the learned model to finite-time transport, which yields on-manifold action sequence generation with as few as one network function evaluation. We present results on the spherical LASA and Push-T benchmarks, on the Tool Hang and Transport tasks of the Robomimic suite, and on the Franka Kitchen task with manifold-constrained action generation, and demonstrate that RMFP attains performance competitive with prior work at a lower sampling cost. We also employ RMFP on a real-world robotic manipulation task to demonstrate fast action generation under imperfect sensor measurements in the physical world. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Visuomotor policy learning infers a distribution over robot action sequences from raw sensor observations, and the demonstrations that supervise it are multimodal, since several distinct action sequences accomplish the same task from the same observation. Generative policies model that distribu-tion directly and avoid the mode averaging incurred by a regression policy trained under a unimodal likelihood [1]. The actions are not Euclidean in general: an end-effector command specifies a position, an orientation and a gripper state, and the action space is therefore a product manifold such as R3 × S 3 × R2 [2]. A policy that treats those coor-dinates as R9 assigns probability mass off the manifold and requires a projection at execution that its training objective does not model. Diffusion [3, 4] and Flow Matching [5] provide the genera-tive backbone of most current manipulation policies [1, 6, 7]. Both generate by integrating a learned field over a time interval, which yields broad mode coverage and a stable regression objective at a cost of one network function evalu-ation (NFE) per integration step. Riemannian Flow Matching               

> Authors are with the Department of Computer Sci-ence, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

{bukhars, garre155, wei577, ni117, zkingston, aniketbera}@purdue.edu              

> (a) RFMP (b) RMFP (Ours) Fig. 1. We present Riemannian MeanFlow Policy (RMFP) for fast action sequence generation on manifolds. Here we show 1-NFE trajectory gener-ation for the LASA shape Wprojected onto S2[8]. Demonstrations from the dataset are shown in black and the executed trajectory is colorized by time-parameterization. ⋆denotes the north pole. As shown, RMFP traces a smoother path while abiding by the demonstrations. Median DTW is 0.023
> for RMFP against 0.079 for RFMP.

Policy (RFMP) transfers this construction to the action manifold by defining the conditional paths as geodesics and integrating the learned velocity field with an exponential-map Euler scheme [2, 8]. While prior work shows that Flow Matching tolerates a coarse grid far better than diffusion does [2], the budget is nonetheless a property of the solver rather than of the objective, and the reported scores are not monotone in it; it must therefore be tuned per task. Sampling with a coarse grid on a Riemannian manifold can lead to mode collapse, which a task success rate alone does not reveal. Few-step generative models instead learn the flow map, the transport that the velocity field induces over a finite interval, so that one NFE performs a finite-time jump. Consistency models enforce self-consistency along the trajectories of a probability-flow ODE [9], and their policy instantiation distils a pretrained Diffusion Policy [10], which adds a sequential training stage and bounds the student by the teacher. Shortcut models [11] and MeanFlow [12] remove the teacher, and MeanFlow regresses the average velocity over an interval, a property of the probability path whose optimum is characterized independently of the network. Three concurrent formulations carry flow map learning to Riemannian manifolds [13–15], and all three report on geospatial, biomolecular or synthetic manifold data. The transfer to policy learning remains open: MeanFlow policies are formulated for Euclidean action spaces [16], and neither the objective nor its parameterizations have been evaluated on the action sequences and product manifolds that a ma-arXiv:2609.30127v1 [cs.RO] 24 Sep 2026 nipulation policy generates. In this work, we present Riemannian MeanFlow Policy (RMFP), which learns the conditioned flow map of the gen-erative probability path on the robot action manifold rather than the instantaneous velocity field that induces it. The formulation is obtained by coupling a flow map consistency term with a Riemannian flow matching anchor, allowing few-step generation at a performance competitive with multi-step state-of-the-art methods for on-manifold action generation. Training needs no teacher and no differential terms, and therefore remains single-stage and first-order, at a cost of four NFEs per gradient step against the one that RFMP pays. We instantiate the policy network under velocity-prediction and endpoint-prediction formulations, which impose the manifold constraint at different points of the forward pass, and evaluate both across tasks. We present the following contributions:  

> •

A flow map formulation of visuomotor policy learning on a product action manifold, coupling the algebraic semigroup identity with a Riemannian Conditional Flow Matching anchor. This enables single-stage policy train-ing without a teacher and without differentiating the geometric maps.  

> •

Endpoint and velocity parameterizations of the network head on the action manifold, an analysis of what each regresses away from the data endpoint, and a compari-son of their empirical performance.  

> •

Extensive evaluation of fast action generation perfor-mance of the proposed formulation against prior work on Riemannian policy learning on benchmarks span-ning Euclidean, spherical, and product action manifolds, demonstrating its efficacy for robot policy learning across a variety of tasks. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Generative Models on Riemannian Manifolds 

Recent work reformulates generative models on Rieman-nian manifolds so that the learned distribution is supported on the manifold by construction. Riemannian continuous normalizing flows parameterize the density as the solu-tion of an ODE constrained to the manifold [17], score-based and variational diffusion models replace the Euclidean forward process with one driven by the manifold’s heat kernel [18, 19], and Riemannian Flow Matching defines the conditional paths as geodesics and regresses their velocity, which removes the simulation and divergence estimates that the earlier formulations require [20]. These constructions support generative models on SE(3) and its factors, for protein backbones [21, 22] and for robot grasp poses [23]. The aforementioned methods sample by integrating the learned vector field along the manifold, which costs multiple NFEs per sample. Three concurrent formulations remove that dependence by learning the flow map. Davis et al. [13] generalize the Euclidean flow map framework to arbi-trary manifolds with Lagrangian, Eulerian and progressive self-distillation objectives; under specific design choices, the Eulerian objective generalizes consistency training and MeanFlow, and the progressive objective generalizes shortcut models. Zhong et al. [15] define the average velocity by parallel transport and train it with the Riemannian form of the MeanFlow differential identity, which is evaluated by Jacobian–vector products; its two loss terms do not align during learning, and it therefore requires conflict-aware multi-task learning. Woo et al. [14] derive Eulerian, Lagrangian and semigroup characterizations of the chord-form average velocity, and find that endpoint prediction scales to high dimensions and that the semigroup form with endpoint prediction trains most stably for protein backbone generation. All three are evaluated on geospatial, biomolec-ular or synthetic manifold data. In robotics, concurrent work applies MeanFlow to 6-DoF grasp synthesis on SE(3) [24] and SO(3) × R3 [25]. We adopt the chord-form average velocity and the alge-braic semigroup characterization, and apply them to end-to-end robot policy learning on different action manifolds, where the generated object is an observation-conditioned manifold-valued action sequence executed in closed loop. 

B. Generative Policy Learning for Robot Manipulation 

Generative visuomotor policies learn a distribution over action sequences from demonstrations and sample from it at execution. Diffusion Policy [1] generates action chunks under receding-horizon control with a denoising backbone, which later work extended with 3D observation encoders [6] and scaled to vision-language-action models built on a flow matching action expert [7]. The sampling cost of these policies has been reduced along three lines, all formulated on Euclidean action spaces: adaptive solvers spend integration steps where the conditional variance of the flow is high [26], distillation transfers a pretrained diffusion policy into aconsistency student [10], and flow map objectives train a few-step generator directly [16]. On a Euclidean action space, an orientation is produced as unconstrained coordinates and mapped onto the rotation group at execution. Riemannian Flow Matching Policy places the probability path on the action manifold, so that samples lie on it by construction [2, 8]; its sampling, however, integrates the learned field over multiple NFEs. This work learns the flow map on the action manifold under geodesic conditional paths; a one-step sample therefore queries the map that the objective regresses, rather than taking a single exponential-map Euler step along the instantaneous field. Training is single-stage and teacher-free, and the objective contains no differential terms. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Background 1) Riemannian Geometry: The action space of a manip-ulator is a smooth manifold rather than a vector space. Let 

A denote the manifold of a single action, which for an end-effector controller is the product A = R3 × S 3 × R2 of a position, a unit quaternion and two finger positions [2]. A policy with prediction horizon Tp emits an action chunk ,and the object it generates is therefore one point of the product manifold M = ATp , which carries the product metric g induced by its factors. We write TaM for the tangent space at a ∈ M , and ⟨· , ·⟩ a and ∥ · ∥ a for the inner product and norm that g induces there. The exponential map 

Exp a : TaM → M carries a tangent vector to the endpoint of the geodesic that leaves a with that initial velocity, and the logarithmic map Log a : M → TaM inverts it within the injectivity radius. Both are available in closed form on the factors used here. The geodesic from a0 to a1 is given as γ(τ ) = Exp a0

 τ Log a0 (a1) for τ ∈ [0 , 1] , and every construction below uses it as the conditional path. 

2) Riemannian Flow Matching Policy: Riemannian Flow Matching Policy (RFMP) learns a time-dependent vector field that transports a tractable prior on M to the demon-stration distribution [2, 8]. Let ρ0 be the prior, a standard Gaussian on each Euclidean factor and a wrapped Gaussian on S3, and let ρ1(· | o) be the distribution of demonstrated action chunks under observation o. Drawing a0 ∼ ρ0 and 

a1 ∼ ρ1(· | o) independently, and a time s ∼ U [0 , 1] , the conditional path is the geodesic as = Exp a0

 sLog a0 (a1),whose velocity ˙as ∈ Tas M is the regression target of 

LRCFM (θ) = E

h

vθ (as, s | o) − ˙as

> 2
> as

i

. (1) The minimizer of (1) is the marginal velocity field 

v(as, s | o) = E[ ˙ as | as, o ], (2) which is the quantity the sampler integrates. Generation partitions [0 , 1] by a grid 0 = t0 < · · · < t T = 1 and advances 

atk+1 = Exp atk

 (tk+1 − tk) vθ (atk , t k | o) (3) from at0 ∼ ρ0. This costs T NFEs, and each step is a first-order approximation of the transport over its interval. 

B. Riemannian MeanFlow Policy 1) MeanFlow Objective: We remove that solver depen-dence by learning the flow map itself, so that transport over a finite interval becomes a single NFE. For 0 ≤ s ≤ t ≤ 1,let Φs,t : M → M be the flow of the marginal field, which carries the marginal at time s to the marginal at time t, and define the average velocity 

u(a, s, t ) := 1

t − s Log a

 Φs,t (a) ∈ TaM, (4) the geodesic chord from a to its image rescaled by the inter-val length [14], which is well defined whenever Φs,t (a) lies within the injectivity radius of Exp a. The map is recovered from (4) by Φs,t (a) = Exp a

 (t − s) u(a, s, t ), and the diagonal limit u(a, s, s ) = v(a, s ) returns the instantaneous field; hence (4) extends rather than replaces the field that RFMP learns. Because Φs,t is the evolution operator of a time-dependent field rather than a one-parameter group, it satisfies the two-parameter composition law Φr,t ◦ Φs,r =Φs,t for every s ≤ r ≤ t, which in terms of the average velocity is the semigroup identity 

u(a, s, t ) = 1

t − s Log a



Φr,t 

 Φs,r (a)

. (5)                                       

> M
> (t−s) ˆ u
> (t−s)uθ
> ˙as
> Lanchor
> Lsemi
> a0
> as
> ˜ar
> ˜at
> a1
> 0srt1
> Fig. 2. The Riemannian flowmap consistency objective (9) and Riemannian conditional flow matching anchor (10) are schematically shown. The hori-zontal axis represents time. A point asis drawn on the conditional geodesic (dashed) from a prior sample a0to a demonstrated chunk a1. The two flow maps through the intermediate time rare rolled out without gradient (grey arcs), and their endpoint ˜atdefines the chord target ˆuof (6). Tangent vectors at asare denoted by straight arrows: the frozen chord (t−s)ˆ u= Log as(˜ at)
> (dashed grey ), the single jump (t−s)uθ(as, s, t )(teal ) that the gradient reaches, and the geodesic velocity ˙as(gold ) against which uθ(as, s, s )is anchored. Lsemi penalizes the residual between the jump and the chord.

Identity (5) is algebraic, as it contains no differential terms, which separates it from the differential MeanFlow identity and its Riemannian counterpart [12, 15]. We train a network 

uθ (a, s, t | o) to satisfy (5). Given a point as on a conditional geodesic and times s ≤ r ≤ t, we define the bootstrap target, 

ˆu = 1

t − s Log as

 sg[˜ at], (6) where ˜at is the composition of two flow map evaluations, 

˜ar = Exp as

 (r − s) uθ (as, s, r | o), (7) 

˜at = Exp ˜ar

 (t − r) uθ (˜ ar , r, t | o). (8) The composition is then regressed via a consistency term: 

Lsemi (θ) = E

h

w(r) uθ (as, s, t | o) − ˆu 2

> as

i

, (9) where sg denotes the stop-gradient operator. The construction is illustrated in Fig. 2. Identity (5) holds for any flow and is therefore data-free; in particular u ≡ 0 satisfies it, and hence (9) cannot by itself determine the field. A Riemannian Conditional Flow Matching anchor supplies the data boundary at t = s,

Lanchor (θ) = E

h

w(s) uθ (as, s, s | o) − ˙as

 2

> as

i

. (10) The weight w(τ ) = (1 − τ )/ max(1 − τ, ϵ ) with ϵ = 0 .1

multiplies the residual inside the norm, and hence enters the squared loss as w2 [14]. 

2) Velocity- and Endpoint-Prediction Parameterizations: 

The network cannot emit uθ directly, since it is a tangent vector at a. We therefore parameterize the network head 

hθ (a, s, t | o) and project its output onto the appropriate subspace. Endpoint prediction reads the head as a point of 

M and sets 

uθ (a, s, t | o) = 11 − s Log a

 ΠM hθ

, (11) where ΠM is the closest-point projection onto M, a normal-ization on the S3 factor and the identity on the Euclidean Algorithm 1 Training step for Riemannian MeanFlow Policy 

Require: manifold M, prior ρ0, demonstrations ρ1, weights 

λanchor , λ semi  

> 1:

sample (o, a 1) ∼ ρ1, a0 ∼ ρ0 

> 2:

encode observation c ← enc θ (o)

// anchor term  

> 3:

sample sa; set asa , ˙asa ← γ(sa), ˙γ(sa) 

> 4:

Lanchor ← ∥ w(sa) ( uθ (asa , s a, s a | c) − ˙asa )∥2

> asa

// semigroup term  

> 5:

sample s ≤ r ≤ t; set as ← γ(s) 

> 6:

˜ar ← Exp as (( r − s)uθ (as, s, r | c)) // no grad  

> 7:

˜at ← Exp ˜ar (( t − r)uθ (˜ ar , r, t | c)) // no grad  

> 8:

Lsemi ← ∥ w(r) ( uθ (as, s, t | c) − Log as (˜ at)/(t − s)) ∥2 

> as
> 9:

update θ on λanchor Lanchor + λsemi Lsemi 

ones. Velocity prediction reads the head as an element of 

TaM and sets uθ (a, s, t | o) = Π TaM hθ , the orthogonal projection onto the tangent space. The two differ in where the manifold constraint is imposed, on M or on TaM, and in the denominator they carry: the endpoint head of (11) divides by 1−s and therefore requires the weight w, whereas velocity prediction has no denominator and does not. Endpoint prediction is literal only at t = 1 . For t < 1

the target of (9) is Log as (˜ at)/(t − s), and the optimal head is therefore Exp as

  1−st−s Log as (˜ at), the s → t geodesic continued at constant speed to time 1. On a curved manifold this agrees with Φs, 1(as) only when the marginal flow is itself geodesic on [s, 1] ; hence away from t = 1 the head is an endpoint estimate used to define the reparameterized velocity. We report how both parameterizations affect performance across tasks and environments. 

3) Overall Training Objective: The training objective is the weighted sum 

L(θ) = λanchor Lanchor (θ) + λsemi Lsemi (θ), (12) with λanchor > 0 required, since (10) is the only term that observes data. Algorithm 1 states one gradient step. It draws one anchor time and one ordered triple, and costs four NFEs: the anchor, the single jump that carries the gradient, and the two frozen flow map evaluations, of which only the first two build a graph. 

C. Implementation Details 

For our method and the baselines, we use the one-dimensional conditional UNet of Diffusion Policy over the action-chunk axis, with feature-wise linear modulation on the encoded observation [1, 2]. State-based settings pass the observation stack directly; vision-based settings encode each camera with a ResNet-18 into a 512-dimensional feature. RFMP and the diffusion baselines condition on one time and RMFP on two. Each time input is mapped via a sinusoidal embedding and an MLP before being stacked with the conditioning. The rest of the architecture is identical across methods. The action manifold is S2 on spherical LASA and spher-ical Push-T, Euclidean on the Robomimic tasks, and R3 ×S3×R2 on Franka Kitchen. Unless stated otherwise, the prior is a standard Gaussian on Euclidean factors and a wrapped Gaussian on spherical factors, centered at the Fréchet mean of the demonstrated points of that factor. On Franka Kitchen that center also pins the quaternion sign: unit quaternions double cover SO(3) and forward kinematics returns q or −q

indifferently, which would otherwise split the demonstrations across the two hemispheres of S3.The anchor time is drawn from Beta(1 .9, 1) , mixed with a uniform draw at probability 0.02 and rescaled to [0 .01 , 1] ,which concentrates the data term near the end of the path, where the conditional endpoint is most informative about the head; only the last ϵ of that range is damped by the pole weight. For the semigroup term the interval length is drawn from Beta(1 .5, 1.5) on [0 .01 , 1] and placed uniformly, with 

r at its midpoint; s and r are then contracted by 0.99 while 

t is left untouched, and the target time therefore reaches 1 as inference requires while the frozen rollout is never evaluated at the degenerate r = 1 . The pole weight uses ϵ = 0 .1, and both loss weights in (12) are 1, except on spherical LASA, where λsemi = 5 . We train with AdamW under a 500-step linear warmup followed by a cosine decay, and evaluate an exponential moving average of the weights. Batch sizes and epoch budgets follow Ding et al. [2], and are identical across the methods compared within a benchmark. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We ask whether a learned action flow map on a Rieman-nian manifold retains task performance at a limited sampling budget under different settings. We evaluate the proposed for-mulation against baselines for Riemannian generative policy learning on four simulated benchmarks and one trajectory-reproduction task. 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Tasks and Datasets: We use four simulated bench-marks (cf. Fig. 3) and one trajectory-reproduction task (cf. Fig. 1) that separate the effect of the training objective from the effect of the geometry of the action space. Spherical LASA is the trajectory-reproduction benchmark of Braun et al. [8] wherein the LASA handwriting demonstrations [27] are projected onto S2. We follow that protocol with M = 7 

demonstrations of Tm = 200 timesteps per shape, including the multimodal shape, and report the dynamic time warping distance (DTW) to the demonstrations and the jerkiness (Jerk) of the generated trajectory. Spherical Push-T replaces the planar agent target of Push-T by its stereographic projec-tion onto S2 and retains the planar coverage reward of the Euclidean environment [1, 2]; we report the coverage score of the target region. From the Robomimic suite [28], we use the Tool Hang and Transport environments. Tool Hang is a state-based environment with a 7-DoF single-arm action space, and Transport comprises both state and vision-based observations with a 14-DoF bimanual action space. Franka Kitchen [29] benchmarks long-horizon, multi-step planning (a) Spherical Push-T (b) Robomimic Tool Hang (c) Robomimic Transport (d) Franka Kitchen Fig. 3. Simulated environments of the evaluation benchmarks. (a) Spherical Push-T: the Push-T canvas under the stereographic map onto S2, with the agent (blue), the block (grey-blue) and the goal pose (green). (b) Robomimic Tool Hang: a single arm inserts a hook into a base and hangs a wrench on it, from a state observation. (c) Robomimic Transport: two arms transfer a hammer from a covered container to a target bin on the opposite shelf, from camera observations. (d) Franka Kitchen: the policy commands an end-effector pose on R3 × S 3 × R2, and an episode counts as a success when at least four of the seven subtasks are completed. 

where error in a single action chunk propagates into every subtask that follows. Here, we use the product-manifold setting of Ding et al. [2], where the policy commands an end-effector pose on R3 × S 3 × R2. A success corresponds to an episode in which at least four of the seven subtasks are completed. The benchmarks form two regimes. On spherical LASA, spherical Push-T, and Franka Kitchen every method is manifold-native, which tests the learning of manifold-valued action sequences. On the Robomimic tasks, the action space is Euclidean and the Riemannian policies therefore reduce to their Euclidean counterparts, which tests the generality of the Riemannian formulations. 

2) Baselines: We benchmark our method’s performance against the following baselines:  

> •

Riemannian Flow Matching Policy (RFMP) [2, 8]: It regresses the instantaneous velocity field of a geodesic probability path on the action manifold and generates via the exponential-map Euler scheme of Section III-A.2. It shares that manifold construction with RMFP and differs only in learning the velocity field instead of the flow map, which isolates the effect of the objective. This is the primary baseline we compare against.  

> •

Riemannian Diffusion Policy (RDP): our own imple-mentation, since no manifold-native diffusion policy ex-ists to the best of our knowledge. It adapts Riemannian score-based generative modeling [18, 19] to visuomotor policy learning, replacing the Euclidean forward noising of Diffusion Policy by a forward process on M and a tangent-space denoiser, after the construction used for SE(3) generation by Yim et al. [21], Urain et al. [23]. It supplies the diffusion comparison on manifold-constrained learning benchmarks.  

> •

Diffusion Policy (DP) [1]: the Euclidean formulation. It generates action chunks by denoising on an uncon-strained action space under receding-horizon control. It is the diffusion baseline on the Robomimic tasks, where the reduction of Section IV-A.1 makes RDP coincide with it under a DDIM sampler [30].                                               

> TABLE I LASA ON S2,TEN CHARACTERS . M EDIAN DTW TO THE DEMONSTRATION ,AND THE EXECUTED PATH ’S JERK (THE DEMONSTRATION EQUALS 1.0); LOWER IS BETTER . ( λsemi = 5 )Method NFE 1 NFE 2 NFE 5 NFE 10 DTW Jerk DTW Jerk DTW Jerk DTW Jerk RFM 0.090 857 0.020 153 0.016 83 0.016 59
> RMF-v0.033 317 0.017 96 0.019 86 0.020 82 RMF-x10.022 153 0.022 146 0.026 143 0.024 113

B. Performance Evaluation 

We evaluate our method against the baselines across budgets of 1, 2, 5 and 10 NFEs per action chunk, reported in Tables I–V. In the tables, RFM abbreviates RFMP and RMF abbreviates the proposed RMFP, whose velocity- and endpoint-prediction parameterizations of Section III-B.2 ap-pear as RMF-v and RMF-x1; RDP-ϵ and RDP-x are the variants of RDP under its noise- and sample-prediction heads. On the Franka Kitchen task, RMF and RFM are additionally trained and evaluated under two different priors on the S3 factor: the suffix -uni draws that factor uniformly on the sphere, and -hemi uniformly on the closed hemisphere that the sign convention of Section III-C selects. A score-based model draws from the terminal law of its forward process rather than from a prior that can be chosen, and the RDP entries therefore carry no prior suffix. 

1) LASA Handwriting Dataset: Each run is trained for 

600 epochs and uses a uniform prior over the hemisphere. In the few-step regime ( NFE ∈ { 1, 2}), both RMF variants produce smoother trajectories than RFM across the ten tested characters (Table I), and at NFE = 1 both also attain a lower median DTW, 0.022 for RMF-x1 and 0.033 for RMF-

v against 0.090 for RFM. Fig. 1 shows this difference: RMF traces a smoother trajectory and follows the demonstrations more closely than RFM. At NFE ≥ 5 the ordering reverses: RFM attains the lowest median DTW, 0.016 at both budgets against 0.019 and 0.020 for RMF-v, at the cost of the additional network evaluations. TABLE II SPHERICAL PUSH -T COVERAGE SCORE AGAINST THE SAMPLING BUDGET                                                                          

> Method Coverage Score (%) ↑
> 1NFE 2NFE 5NFE 10 NFE RDP-ϵ15.0 51.8 83.9 81.6 RDP-x73.1 74.0 76.0 74.4 RFM 67.9 77.2 84.7 83.9 RMF-v78.5 81.0 85.7 84.1 RMF-x176.0 78.3 81.7 85.0
> TABLE III FRANKA KITCHEN SUCCESS RATE AGAINST THE SAMPLING BUDGET
> Method Success Rate (%) ↑
> 1NFE 2NFE 5NFE 10 NFE RDP-ϵ3.7 19.7 36.9 47.1 RDP-x23.7 41.7 43.1 39.1 RFM-uni 14.9 40.3 44.3 41.1 RFM-hemi 20.6 41.7 47.1 48.6 RMF-v-uni 34.9 41.7 44.3 45.1 RMF-v-hemi 40.6 41.1 46.0 43.4 RMF-x1-uni 41.4 43.4 44.6 48.9
> RMF-x1-hemi 41.7 46.0 47.7 46.9

2) Spherical Push-T: At NFE = 1 , both RMF variants exceed every baseline (Table II): RMF-v reaches 78 .5 against 

67 .9 for RFM and 73 .1 for RDP-x. The margin closes as the budget grows, from 3.8 points at NFE = 2 to 1.0 at 

NFE = 5 , and at NFE = 10 the leading entry of the two RMF variants is 85 .0 against 83 .9 for the baselines. The two diffusion variants fail differently. RDP-ϵ collapses to 15 .0 at 

NFE = 1 and closes on the other methods only at NFE = 5 ,whereas RDP-x, whose head emits a point of the action space rather than the perturbation applied to it, does not collapse; it spans 2.9 points across the whole sweep ( 73 .1 to 76 .0) and remains below the NFE = 10 entry of every other method. 

3) Franka Kitchen: At NFE = 1, the weakest RMF variant, RMF-v-uni at 34 .9, exceeds the strongest baseline, RDP-x at 23 .7, by 11 .2 points (Table III). Against the prior-matched flow-matching baseline the margin is 21 .1

points for RMF-x1-hemi over RFM-hemi and 26 .5 for RMF-

x1-uni over RFM-uni. The margin again closes with the budget, from 4.3 points at NFE = 2 to 0.6 at NFE = 5 ,and at NFE = 10 the leading entries are 48 .9 against 

48 .6. No entry exceeds 48 .9: the long-horizon, multi-step reasoning requirement of Section IV-A.1 holds every method far from a perfect score, and the NFE = 1 margins are correspondingly wider than on Push-T. RFM-hemi loses 28 .0

points at NFE = 1 against its own best budget, and RDP-ϵ

collapses to 3.7 and closes only at NFE = 10 ; RDP-x is stable from NFE = 2 upward, where it spans 4.0 points, and loses 18 .0 points at one against its NFE = 2 entry. The hemisphere prior is worth most at NFE = 1 and to the velocity head: 5.7 points to RFM ( 20 .6 against 14 .9) and 

5.7 to RMF-v (40 .6 against 34 .9), against 0.3 to RMF-x1

(41 .7 against 41 .4). The endpoint prediction variant RMF-                                                       

> TABLE IV ROBOMIMIC TOOL HANG SUCCESS RATE AGAINST THE SAMPLING BUDGET
> Method Success Rate (%) ↑
> 1NFE 2NFE 5NFE 10 NFE DP 0.0 46.0 64.0 74.0
> RFM 60.0 60.0 60.0 64.0 RMF-v64.0 76.0 72.0 74.0
> RMF-x148.0 52.0 60.0 74.0
> TABLE V ROBOMIMIC TRANSPORT SUCCESS RATE AGAINST THE SAMPLING BUDGET
> Method Success Rate (%) ↑
> 1NFE 2NFE 5NFE 10 NFE DP 0.0 82.0 96.0 82.0 RFM 94.0 86.0 88.0 86.0 RMF-v90.0 92.0 92.0 92.0
> RMF-x194.0 90.0 92.0 90.0

x1 regresses, at the prior sample, a point of M rather than a tangent vector, which is consistent with it being the variant least sensitive to the prior at the budget where a single transport must cover the whole interval. 

4) Robomimic Tool Hang: The Robomimic suite has a Euclidean action space, which removes the geometric con-struction from the comparison. RMF-v leads at every budget 

≤ 5 NFE (Table IV), by 4.0 points over RFM at NFE = 1 ,by 16 .0 at NFE = 2 and by 8.0 over DP at NFE = 5 , and its two-evaluation entry of 76 .0 is the largest in the table. The NFE = 1 entry of RMF-v equals the NFE = 5 entry of DP and the NFE = 10 entry of RFM, both at 64 .0. DP collapses to 0.0 at NFE = 1 and recovers monotonically, reaching 74 .0 only at NFE = 10 , whereas RFM holds 60 .0

through NFE = 5 and reaches 64 .0 at NFE = 10 , the only method in the table that does not attain the 74 .0 the other three reach. On a Euclidean action space a one-step RFM sample is the conditional mean of the demonstrations, and the task metric nonetheless registers a loss of only 4.0 points against its own NFE = 10 entry. 

5) Robomimic Transport: The Transport task from the Robomimic suite carries the Euclidean reduction into the other observation modality and onto a 14-DoF bimanual action space conditioned on proprioception and multi-view camera observations. The benchmark does not separate the three flow-based arms (Table V), whose entries lie between 

86 .0 and 94 .0 with no pairwise difference at a fixed bud-get above 6.0 points; it separates the diffusion baseline at 

NFE = 1 alone, where DP is 0.0 and no other arm falls below 90 .0. RMF-v is the one arm that is constant for 

NFE ≥ 2, at 92 .0. Here the task metric registers no loss: the one-evaluation entry of 94 .0 is the largest RFM attains. Hence, alongwith the Tool Hang benchmark, we observe that the semigroup objective trains unmodified and the low-budget margin it holds on the unsaturated member of the pair is therefore not an artifact of curvature. Across the benchmarks, we note that the flow map con-sistency objective buys the low-budget regime rather than a higher ceiling: on spherical Push-T and Franka Kitchen its margin over flow matching is largest at NFE = 1 and falls to at most 1.0 point at NFE = 5 . Furthermore, it flattens the response to varying NFE budgets. Read as a range over the four budgets of those two benchmarks, each RMF arm spans at most 10 .2 points, against 16 .8 to 29 .4 for the flow-matching arms and 43 .4 to 68 .9 for RDP-ϵ. The RMF entries at 2, 5 and 10 NFE query interval lengths inside the dense part of the training law of Section III-C, and their agreement with the NFE = 1 entry, within 7.2 points for RMF-v on Push-T and 6.0 for RMF-x1-hemi on Franka Kitchen, is what evidences that the extrapolation from those lengths to the full interval holds. The two parameterizations do not order consistently. At NFE = 1 , RMF-v leads RMF-x1 by 2.5

points on spherical Push-T and by 16 .0 points on Tool Hang, whereas RMF-x1 leads by 6.5 points under the uniform prior and by 1.1 points under the hemisphere prior on Franka Kitchen. The ordering tracks the dimension of the action rather than its curvature: the endpoint parameterization leads on the nine-coordinate product action of Franka Kitchen and trails on the seven-dimensional Tool Hang action and on spherical Push-T. This matches the direction reported by Woo et al. [14], who find endpoint prediction the more stable head in high dimension, albeit on a quantity this protocol does not measure. Transport places its 14-DoF action on the leading side, by 4.0 points at NFE = 1, a margin that benchmark does not resolve. Reporting both heads is therefore not redundant: as Section III-B.2 states, the two impose the manifold constraint at different points of the forward pass and have no reason to agree. 

C. Real-world Deployment 

To demonstrate the applicability of our approach to prac-tical robotic manipulation, we evaluate the learned policies on a real-world robotic platform. Our hardware setup con-sists of a 6-DoF I2RT YAM robotic arm equipped with a linear parallel-jaw gripper and controlled over CAN by an NVIDIA Jetson Thor, which also hosts policy inference. The workspace is observed using two RGB-D cameras: an external Orbbec Femto Mega ( 1280 × 720 at 30 Hz) mounted in front of the workspace to provide a global third-person view, and an Intel RealSense D405 ( 640 × 480 

at 30 Hz) mounted on the robot wrist to provide close-range observations during manipulation. The external camera is hand-eye calibrated with respect to the robot base, and both cameras remain fixed throughout data collection and evaluation. For real-world evaluation, we collect additional demon-strations directly on the physical system across a set of ma-nipulation tasks. The demonstrations contain synchronized visual observations and robot trajectories, which are used to train the policies before deployment on the same hardware platform. The resulting policies are executed on the physical robot using observations from both camera views together   

> Fig. 4. Riemannian MeanFlow Policy executed in a real-world manipulation task. The policy is trained on 60 real-world demonstrations and deployed on the YAM robotic platform. Representative stages of the rollout show the robot approaching and grasping the object, transporting it to a goal state, and placing it into the target container.

with robot proprioception. Fig. 4 shows an example of a real-world rollout of RMF. We provide video demonstrations in the supplementary material. V. C ONCLUSION 

This work addresses the sampling cost of geometrically constrained visuomotor policies by learning the flow map of the generative probability path instead of the velocity field that induces it. The Riemannian MeanFlow Policy regresses the average velocity on the robot action manifold under an algebraic semigroup identity imposed as a flow map consistency, anchored to the demonstrations by Riemannian Conditional Flow Matching. The identity is algebraic and carries no differential terms, which keeps training first-order and stable. The formulation trains in a single stage without distilling from a teacher, and the map queried by a one-step sample is the map the objective regresses. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Claude Code was used for language polishing and editorial assistance. All technical content, equations, experimental results, and final manuscript text were reviewed and verified by the authors, who assume full responsibility for the final manuscript. REFERENCES [1] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 44, no. 10-11, pp. 1684–1704, 2025. [2] H. Ding, N. Jaquier, J. Peters, and L. Rozo, “Fast and robust visuomo-tor Riemannian flow matching policy,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,vol. 41, pp. 5327–5343, 2025. [3] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [4] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations,” in International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations (ICLR) , 2021. [5] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow matching for generative modeling,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [6] Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu, “3D Diffusion Policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3D representations,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [7] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. R. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky, “ π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,2025. [8] M. Braun, N. Jaquier, L. Rozo, and T. Asfour, “Riemannian flow matching policy for robot motion learning,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2024, pp. 5144– 5151. [9] Y. Song, P. Dhariwal, M. Chen, and I. Sutskever, “Consistency models,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2023. [10] A. Prasad, K. Lin, J. Wu, L. Zhou, and J. Bohg, “Consistency Policy: Accelerated visuomotor policies via consistency distillation,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [11] K. Frans, D. Hafner, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel, “One step diffusion via shortcut models,” in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2025. [12] Z. Geng, M. Deng, X. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and K. He, “Mean flows for one-step generative modeling,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. [13] O. Davis, M. S. Albergo, N. M. Boffi, M. M. Bronstein, and A. J. Bose, “Generalised flow maps for few-step generative modelling on Riemannian manifolds,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. [14] D. Woo, M. Skreta, S. Park, K. Neklyudov, and S. Ahn, “Rieman-nian MeanFlow,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2026. [15] Z. Zhong, H. Sun, Y. Zhao, Y. Gong, and Y. Yin, “Riemannian MeanFlow for one-step generation on manifolds,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2026. [16] J. Sheng, Z. Wang, P. Li, and M. Liu, “MP1: MeanFlow tames policy learning in 1-step for robotic manipulation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 40, no. 22, 2026, pp. 18 532–18 539. [17] E. Mathieu and M. Nickel, “Riemannian continuous normalizing flows,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [18] V. De Bortoli, E. Mathieu, M. Hutchinson, J. Thornton, Y. W. Teh, and A. Doucet, “Riemannian score-based generative modelling,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [19] C.-W. Huang, M. Aghajohari, A. J. Bose, P. Panangaden, and A. Courville, “Riemannian diffusion models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [20] R. T. Q. Chen and Y. Lipman, “Flow matching on general geometries,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2024. [21] J. Yim, B. L. Trippe, V. De Bortoli, E. Mathieu, A. Doucet, R. Barzilay, and T. Jaakkola, “SE(3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation,” in International Conference on Machine Learn-ing (ICML) , 2023. [22] A. J. Bose, T. Akhound-Sadegh, G. Huguet, K. Fatras, J. Rector-Brooks, C.-H. Liu, A. C. Nica, M. Korablyov, M. Bronstein, and A. Tong, “SE(3)-stochastic flow matching for protein backbone gen-eration,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [23] J. Urain, N. Funk, J. Peters, and G. Chalvatzaki, “SE(3)-DiffusionFields: Learning smooth cost functions for joint grasp and motion optimization through diffusion,” in IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. [24] J. Kwon, Y. Bai, A. Mollaali, and G. Lin, “GraspMeanFlow: SE(3)-equivariant MeanFlow for few-step 6-DoF grasp generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.03295 , 2026. [25] S. T. Bukhari, Y. Wei, R. Ni, Z. Kingston, and A. Bera, “Fast gener-ative grasping via Lie group-constrained MeanFlow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.26076 , 2026. [26] X. Hu, B. Liu, X. Liu, and Q. Liu, “AdaFlow: Imitation learning with variance-adaptive flow-based policies,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [27] S. M. Khansari-Zadeh and A. Billard, “Learning stable nonlinear dynamical systems with Gaussian mixture models,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 943–957, 2011. [28] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu, and R. Martín-Martín, “What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipula-tion,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2021. [29] A. Gupta, V. Kumar, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and K. Hausman, “Relay policy learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforce-ment learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019. [30] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021.