Title: 2609.10339v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10339v1

Published Time: Thu, 10 Sep 2026 01:18:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
A Confidence -Aware Multimodal Fusion  Framework 

# for  Industrial  Human -Robot Collaboration 

Xinyu  Liu , Qiqi Dong, Boy a Jia, Yi Zhang , Binbin Lian 

Abstract —A confidence -aware multimodal fusion framework 

(CAMF)  is proposed to realize reliable human intention prediction 

for industrial human -robot collaboration. This framework fuses 

four heterogeneous modalities including object 6D pose, gaze, 

skeletal motion and IMU -based hand motion. It embeds a

confidence -trend -driven dynamic fusion mechanism into BiLSTM 

to adaptively balance bidirectional temporal features according to 

real -time modality reliability. A confidence -guided balanced 

learning strategy combined with a confidence freezing mechanism 

is further adopted  to adjust network gradients dynamically, 

suppress noise from low -quality modalities and mitigate cross -

modal learning bias. A physical platform based on the UR3 

collaborative robot is built for experimental validation. 

Comparative results show that the pro posed method reaches an 

intention recognition accuracy of 91.86% and outperforms 

existing multimodal fusion approaches in overall performance and 

stability. It also maintains satisfactory accuracy under low light 

and partial occlusion interference. In prac tical assembly tasks, the 

framework enables proactive and stable human -robot cooperation 

with strong environmental adaptability. 

Note to Practitioners — In the field of industrial human -robot 

collaboration, accurate human intention understanding serves as 

a core prerequisite for realizing safe, efficient and seamless 

collaborative assembly tasks in practical workshops. Single -modal 

perception is vulnerable  to varying lighting conditions, human 

occlusions and inherent sensor noise in complex working 

environments. Current multimodal fusion methods mostly adopt 

static fusion strategies, which fail to dynamically evaluate real -

time modali ty reliability and commonly suffer from imbalanced 

learning across different data modalities. They also lack the 

capability of proactive human intention prediction, greatly 

limiting their practical deployment in high -precision and fast -

paced industrial tas ks. This paper presents a confidence -aware 

multimodal fusion framework (CAMF) to tackle the above 

challenging issues. The system integrates depth camera and 9 -axis 

IMU to capture multi -source human behavioral data, and 

leverages a series of confidence -rela ted mechanisms to adaptively 

optimize feature fusion and model training processes. The 

proposed algorithm is fully compatible with mainstream sensors 

and robotic systems built upon ROS2, and it can be easily deployed 

and applied to a wide range of industri al assembly scenarios. 

Experimental test results prove that this method possesses strong 

anti -interference capability and stable performance under 

complex on -site working conditions. Future work will extend this 

method to more sophisticated human -robot col laboration tasks. 

Index Terms —Human -robot collaboration (HRC),  multimodal 

fusion,  intention prediction, industrial assembly, balanced 

multimodal learning .

I.  INTRODUCTION 

HE  human -robot  collaboration (HRC)  technology has 

been widely applied in industries such as aerospace, 

heavy equipment manufacturing, and construction [1], 

[2], [3] . This technology acts as a core pillar of Industry 4.0 and 

intelligent manufacturing  [4] . However, current industrial HRC 

systems lack the capability of cognitive understanding in 

complex scenarios, especially in adapting to the uncertain 

factors introduced by human operators  [5] . This deficiency 

seriously hinders the realization of efficient and seamless 

human -robot collaboration [ 6], [ 7].  To achieve flexible and 

intelligent human -robot collaboration in complex industrial 

environments, robot systems must be equipped with human -

centric deep cognitive capabilities for complex scenarios . These 

capabilities enable robots to accurately capture the dynamic 

changes in human behaviors and working environments. 

The core challenge in cognitive understanding of complex 

scenarios lies in the dynamic and ambiguous nature of scene 

elements, with humans being the most uncertain factor. 

Cognitive perception in complex industrial settings goes beyond 

simple environmental sensing; it requires integrating 

multidimensional human -related information, such as body 

movements, gaze, applied force, and interactions with 

surrounding equipment.  Unimodal methods cannot fully capture 

this rich contextual information, whereas multimodal approaches 

are needed to support effective perception.  This limitation 

degrades the performance of human –robot collaboration (HRC) 

systems in dynamic and complex assembly tasks [ 8], [ 9], [ 10 ]. 

Multimodal perception and fusion have emerged as a

promising solution to overcome the limitations of unimodal 

methods.  This method integrates visual, tactile, inertial, and other 

sensory data to exploit cross -modal complementarity and 

redundancy, thereby improving the accuracy and robustness of 

human intent recognition [ 11 ], [ 12 ].  Liu et al. [1 3] proposed a 

machine learning based multimodal fusion architecture for 

industrial production environments. The system combines 

speech , hand motion and body motion. It achieves significantly 

better performance than any single modality and supports robust 

human robot collaboration in manufacturing.  Wang et al. [1 4]

proposed a function block -based multimodal control method for 

human –robot collaborative assembly. The method uses haptic, 

gesture and voice commands to achieve programming -free robot 

control . Similarly,  Duan et al. [1 5] presented a dual arm robot 

# THRC framework that fuses gesture, speech, human pose, and 

visual information. They validated its effectiveness and 

robustness in a self contained crown -blade -rotor assembly 

system. 

Effective intent understanding requires not only data fusion 

but also uncertainty -aware strategies that account for inter -

modal correlations during the fusion process [1 6].  Two primary 

approaches have been explored to address uncertainty in 

multimodal intent understanding. The first focuses on dynamic 

fusion during inference, where modality -specific confidence is 

used as a real -time indicator to adaptively adjust fusion weigh ts 

[17].  Trick et al. [1 8] proposed a Bayesian Independent Opinion 

Pool  – based multimodal intent recognition method for 

eldercare, fusing probability outputs from speech, gesture, gaze, 

and scene objects via product combination to adaptively assess 

modality reliability, thereby enhancing robustness and 

accuracy.  Jiang et al. [1 9] proposed a human -in -the -loop 

multimodal fusion algorithm that dynamically adjusts modality 

weights using user feedback within an improved DS theory ,

effective in challenging scenarios such as muted meetings, low 

light conditions, and service interactions.  The second integrates 

confidence estimation directly into the training process, 

embedding reliability modeling into the network architecture so 

that inter -modal dependencies and uncertainty characteristics 

are learned end -to -end [20 ].  Han et al. [21 ] proposed 

Multimodal Dynamics, a framework that jointly learns feature -

level confidence through bilinear pooling and modality -level 

confidence via gated mechanisms during training, effectively 

capturing dynamic reliability variations across modalities.  Zhao 

et al. [ 22 ] combined an extended Independent Opinion Pool 

with constrained batch -wise confidence learning to reduce 

uncertainty in intent recognition from gesture, speech, and gaze, 

achieving superior performance over conventional methods in 

kitchen HRC tasks. 

To enable proactive human –robot collaboration, intent 

recognition must extend beyond the perception of current states .

A core objective is thus predictive behavior understanding, 

which anticipates future actions by modeling the spatiotemporal 

patterns of ongoing activity.  Various approaches have been 

proposed for this purpose, including recurrent models [ 23], 

[24], convolutional networks [ 25], [2 6], generative models [2 7], 

[2 8], and Transformers [2 9], [ 30 ]. Among them, Long Short -

Term Memory  (LSTM)[ 31 ] are widely used for intent 

prediction. Through gated mechanisms , LSTM effectively 

mitigates the vanishing or exploding gradient problems of 

conventional RNNs and excels at capturing long -term temporal 

dependencies, making it well suited for modeling sequential 

human behaviors with strong temporal structure.  To enhance 

prediction accuracy and robustness in complex scenarios, 

researchers commonly integrate LSTM with complementary 

architectures to better capture and fuse temporal features. 

Chellali et al. [ 32 ] proposed a multi -variate LSTM for arm 

movement prediction in human -robot hand clapping, 

integrating RGB -D sensor -acquired 3D position data of 

shoulder, elbow and wrist to predict final hand position and 

contact time via initial movement samples. Liu et a l. [ 33]

developed a CNN -LSTM framework for manufacturing HRC 

motion prediction, where VGG16 extracts visual features and 

LSTM models temporal evolution, enabling ongoing motion 

prediction without wearable sensors for tasks like computer 

disassembly. Ma et al. [ 34] designed a Bi -LSTM for sEMG -

based continuous upper -limb movement estimation, 

concatenating forward/backward branches to capture 

historical/future features, exploit global sequential 

dependencies in sEMG signals, and mitigate unidirectional 

models’ limita tion in processing asynchronous biosignals. 

Despite advances in multimodal fusion and intention 

prediction for human -robot collaboration, existing methods 

remain inadequate in complex industrial settings. Real -world 

industrial environments often involve strong lighting, metallic 

reflections, occlusi ons, and electromagnetic interference, which 

severely degrade the reliability of multimodal sensor signals. 

Current systems lack mechanisms to suppress noisy or low -

confidence modalities during training and rely on static fusion 

strategies during inference , failing to adapt to dynamic changes 

in modality reliability. This limits overall robustness. 

Moreover, they generally lack the ability to predict human 

intentions proactively, hindering timely and seamless 

collaboration in fast -paced, high -precision indu strial tasks. 

To address key challenges in complex industrial settings, 

including dynamically varying modality reliability, noise 

susceptibility during training, and the lack of proactive 

intention prediction, we propose a confidence -driven 

multimodal human -robot collab oration framework named 

Confidence -Aware Multimodal Fusion Framework (CAMF). 

CAMF deeply fuses five modalities:  object 6D pose,  gaze, 

skeletal motion,  and  IMU -based hand motion. By estimating 

real -time confidence for each modality, it dynamically 

regulates optimization during training by temporarily freezing 

updates of low -confidence modalities to suppress noise, and 

adaptively fuses temporal context during  inference according to 

confidence trends. This enables robust and accurate intention 

prediction, with effectiveness and adaptability validated in real -

world assembly tasks. 

The main contributions of this work are summarized as 

follows: 

1)  We propose a confidence -driven multimodal human –

robot interaction framework that deeply fuses four 

modalities:  object 6D pose,  gaze,  skeletal motion,  and 

IMU -based hand motion . Fusion is adaptively guided by 

real -time confidence estimates from each modality, and 

the approach is validated for effectiveness and robustness 

in real -world assembly scenarios. 

2)  A balanced multimodal learning method was adopted to 

adaptively control the optimization of each modality by 

monitoring the discrepancy in their contributions to the 

learning objective.  A confidence -guided dual mechanism 

was integrated into this method. The mechanism fuses 

BiLSTM outputs via confidence -weighted aggregation 

for final prediction, while temporarily freezing network 

updates of low -confidence modalities to suppress noise 

inter ference. 

3)  A confidence -trend -driven dynamic fusion mechanism 

was presented within  Bi LSTM  to adaptively balance forward and backward temporal contexts according to the 

time -varying reliability of each modality during 

interaction. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The proposed 

method is detailed in Section II. Experimental results are 

presented in Section III. The discussion is provided in Section 

IV, and the conclusion is given in Section V. 

Fig.  1. Overall architecture of the Confidence -Aware Multimodal Fusion  Framework  (CAMF) .

II.  METHODS 

In this section, the overall architecture and working principle 

of CAMF are introduced. The framework consists of three 

parts: multimodal feature extraction, feature fusion and 

intention prediction , as shown in Fig. 1 . For multimodal feature 

extraction, skeletal motion, gaze and object pose are extracted 

from visual information,  and  hand motion from IMU. F our 

types of features from two  heterogeneous modalities are 

processed independently and in parallel to generate recognition 

results and confidence for each modality. For feature fusion, 

information of all modalities is integrated with the confidence 

trend -driven strategy and confidence  weighting strategy. For 

intention prediction, based on the fused features, the final 

human intention is accurately inferred via the multimodal 

balanced learning algorithm with the confidence freezing 

mechanism introduced. 

A.  Multimodal Feature Extraction 

Four  human intention -related modalities are extracted in 

parallel:  object 6D pose, gaze, skeletal motion,  and  hand 

motion . Object 6D pose, gaze, skeletal motion  are from visual 

data  and  hand motion from IMU. Each modality is processed 

independently, with real -time confidence estimation guiding 

subsequent adaptive fusion and intention prediction. 

1)  Scene Recognition :

Fig.  2. FoundationPose -Based Scene Perception . (a)  Scene 

perception framework . (b)  Object pose estimation results .

FoundationPose is employed for 6D object pose estimation 

and tracking from the input video stream  [3 5]. The overall 

framework is illustrated in Fig.  2(a). Target  object pose and 

prediction confidence are extracted from RGB‑D images, with 

object mask and CAD model as supplementary inputs.  In Pose 

Initialization, the median 3D point in the mask region is used as 

the object center. Coarse pose hypotheses are generated by 

uniform viewpoint sampling on a unit sphere and in -plane 

rotation discretization.  In Pose Refinement, pose hypotheses 

and cropped image regions are fed into an encoder -residual 

network that predicts translation and rotation updates. The 

refined pose is obtained iteratively as follows: t t tR R R

> ++

= +  =  

(1) 

where ,t R+ + are  the refined translation and rotation . are  the translation update  and  rotation update .

In Pose Selection, refined poses are used to render synthetic 

images from the CAD model. Features from real and synthetic 

images are concatenated and fed into a scoring module with 

multi -head self -attention. The network is trained with a pose -

conditioned t riplet loss as follows: ( , ) max( ( ) ( ) ,0) L i i S i S i 

   

> +−−+

= − +

(2)

where  is  the  contrastive  margin .( ), ( )S i S i − + are the scores 

assigned by the scoring module to the positive and negative 

pose samples .

The pose with the highest score from the scoring module is 

selected as the final result , as shown  in  Fig.  2(b) . The Scene 

Recognition confidence is obtained via a Sigmoid nonlinear 

mapping of this highest score: 12

11 exp( )

> scene scene

C P

 = + −

(3)

where scene P is the highest score output by the scoring module, 

and 1 2,

  are weight coefficients. 

2)  Gaze Recognition :

Fig.  3. Gaze feature extraction framework .

Gaze Target Estimation via Large -Scale Learned Encoders 

(Gaze -LLE)  is employed to analyze the input video stream, 

extracting gaze point and confidence  [36] , is shown in Fig. 3 .

Gaze -LLE takes scene RGB images and head bounding boxe 

detected by MediaPipe as inputs. A frozen DINOv2 backbone 

extracts image features. A Head Position Prompt mechanism 

encodes head position into learnable embeddings, which 

modulate the scene feature map  additively. A lightweight 

Transformer decoder processes the modulated features to 

output a gaze probability heatmap. The gaze point is determined 

by applying argmax to the heatmap, with the maximum 

probability as the prediction confidence. The spatial pro ximity 

between the gaze point and the target detection frame center is 

also incorporated to evaluate fixation reliability. The gaze 

recognition confidence is as  follow s:1 231 tanh( )    

> gaze gaze gaze gaze gaze object

C P LL x x

 = += − −

(4)

where gaze P is the maximum probability value from the gaze 

heatmap .gaze L is the position reliability .1 2 3, ,

   are weight 

coefficients .,gaze object x x are the gaze point coordinates, and  the 

mean position coordinates of candidate target objects .

3)  Skeletal Motion Recognition :

Fig.  4. Skeletal motion feature extraction framework .

Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional Networks  (ST -GCN) 

are adopted to preprocess skeleton data obtained by OpenPose 

3D  [37] , is shown in Fig.  4. The skeleton data is represented as 

a graph { , }G V E = , with adjacency matrix {0,1} N N

A 

 .,V E 

are  the set of joints.  and  edges connecting adjacent joints. 

Spatial configuration partitioning divides each node’s 

neighborhood into three subsets.  The root node itself . The 

centripetal group, consisting of neighboring nodes closer to the 

skeleton's gravity center.  The centrifugal group, containing all 

other nodes.  The ST -GCN spatial graph convolution processes 

the skeleton graph. Kout k k in kk

X M A X W =  

(5)

where ,in out X X are the input and output features .kM is  the 

node importance mask .1 12 2   

> kkkk

A A 

> −−

=  % is the normalized 

adjacency matrix .kW is the learnable weight vector. 

Motion rationality confidence evaluates skeleton feature 

reliability.  It incorporates joint spatial consistency and 

physiological constraint satisfaction: ( )   

> 12( , ),min ,max

1 1, ,1 count( [ , ])                

> kelet ssssijij ijin i j Esvvvval keletal keletal keletal keletal V

C P LP x x L x x XEL V

  

> 

= += − − = 

# 

(6)

where ,gesture gesture P L are  joint spatial consistency and 

physiological constraint satisfaction .1 2,

  are weight 

coefficients. ij L is the physiological bone length .v

 is the 

bending angle .,min ,max ,v v

  are the physiological angle ranges .

4)  Hand Motion Recognition :

Fig.  5. Hand  motion feature extraction framework .

A 9 -axis  inertial measurement unit  (IMU ) is used to record 

hand motion, including 3 -axis acceleration, 3 -axis gyroscope, 

and 3 -axis magnetometer data. A Double -Stage Kalman Filter 

is employed to estimate the attitude tq , with the corresponding hand motion feature extraction framework illustrated in Fig. 5. 

The prior attitude tq− is predicted by integrating the angular 

velocity  and  the attitude estimation at the previous time step. 

The first stage corrects pitch and roll using acceleration 

measurements az . The theoretical gravity vector is T1 ( ) ( )[0 0 ]k kh q R q g− −

=

, where ( )kR q − is the direction 

cosine matrix and g is the gravitational acceleration.  The 

second stage corrects yaw using magnetometer measurements mz

. The theoretical magnetic field is T2 ( ) ( )[0 1 0] k kh q R q − −

=

. Both stages update the correction 

via the EKF: T T 1

( )( ( )) 

K E H HE H Rq q K z h q    

> −−−−−

= += + −

(7)

where , ,K H R  are the Kalman gain, measurement matrix, and 

noise covariance matrix .E− is the prior error covariance .

The hand motion confidence is derived from the prior error 

covariance and the reliability of the direction. 1 2

exp( tr( )), max(0, )   

> hand hand hand hand hand

C P La b P E L a b

 

> −

= += − =

(8)

where ,hand hand P L are  the prediction confidence of the hand pose 

and  the reliability of the direction .1 2,

  are weight coefficients. tr( )P−

is  the trace of the matrix. a is the hand motion direction 

vector obtained by subtracting the gravity component from the 

accelerometer reading .b is the direction vector from the hand 

to the mean position coordinates of candidate target objects 

B. Confidence -Weighted Multimodal Feature Fusion 

Human -robot collaboration is essentially a continuous 

sequential process, where both human intent and environmental 

state evolve dynamically over time.  To effectively capture such 

temporal dependencies and contextual information, the 

extracted feature and corresponding confidence value of each 

modality are fed into an individual BiLSTM network for 

temporal encoding.  The temporally encoded feature 

representations of each individual modality are then input into 

fully connected (FC) layers to implement multimo dal feature 

aggregation.  During the aggregation process, the weights in the 

FC layers are adaptively assigned in accordance with the real -

time confidence values of each respective modality.  This 

confidence -guided fusion strategy provides a stable and 

adaptive feature representation for the subsequent dynamic 

temporal context balancing and final intention inference. 

1)  Temporal Context Fusion with Confidence Trend 

Guidance : BiLSTM is adopted as the core architecture to 

capture bidirectional temporal dependencies in human -robot 

collaboration sequences.  It performs temporal encoding on the 

extracted features of each modality.  It overcomes the limitation 

of unidirectional information propagation in traditional 

recurrent neural networks.  BiLSTM consists of two LSTM 

units with opposite input directions, namely forward and 

backward.  Its modeling capability fundamentally relies on the 

internal gating mechanism of LSTM  [38] .

Fig.  6. Confidence -trend -driven bidirectional temporal context 

fusion architecture .

LSTM contains three core gate structures: the forget gate, the 

input gate, and the output gate.  These gates jointly control the 

retention, update, and output of temporal information. 

Forget Gate: This gate determines what information to 

discard from the cell state. 1( [ , ] )t f t i ff W h s b



> −

=  +

(9)

where tf is the forget gate.  is the sigmoid function. fW and f

b

are the weights and biases. 1th − is the previous hidden state. 

The hidden state conveys past information to subsequent steps 

and serves as the current output, offering essential context for 

sequence modeling. 

Input Gate: This gate decides what new information to add 

to the cell state. 11

( [ , ] )tanh( [ , ] )        

> titiitctic

i W h s bc W h s b



> −−

=  +=  +

(10 )

where ti is the input gate. tc is the candidate  memory ., , ,i c cW b W b

are the respective weights and biases. 1t t t t tc f c i c−=  +  

(11 )

Output Gate: This gate determines what information to 

output from the cell state. 1( [ , ] )t o t i oo W h s b



> −

=  +

(12 )

where to is the output gate. ,o oW b are the weights and biases. tanh( )t t th o c= 

(13 )

As  shown  in  Fig.  6, BiLSTM  employs two independent 

LSTM units to model distinct temporal state transitions.  The 

forward unit models the transition  from past to current time step 1t t− →

. The backward unit captures the transition from future 

to current time step 1t t+ → . Within a fixed window of size W

, the forward LSTM processes the input subsequence 1 2, ,..., t W t W tx x x− + − +in chronological order to generate the 

forward hidden state th

  . The backward LSTM processes the 

same subsequence in reverse order , from tx to 1t Wx − + , generate 

the backward hidden state th

  . The final bidirectional hidden 

state at time step t is obtained by fusing the outputs of the two 

units: bi t t th h h= +

 

(14)

Fixed weighting for bidirectional outputs in BiLSTM cannot 

adaptively adjust the contribution of forward and backward 

temporal contexts according to the dynamic characteristics of 

sequential data. To overcome this limitation, a confidence -

trend -driven dyna mic weighting strategy is proposed.  The 

dynamically fused bidirectional hidden state is formulated as: 1 2bi t t t t th h h

 = +

 

(15)

where 1 2

,t t

  are weight coefficients.  They  are constructed 

based on the temporal variation trend of modality confidence. 

The forward confidence trend for tT and backward confidence 

trend back tT are calculated as follows: 1 1112

1111          

> tfor kktktWktback kktktWk

C CT W CC CT W C   

> −+= − +−= − +

−= −−= −

# 

(16)

where kC denotes the confidence value at the  k-th time step 

within the sliding window. 

Based on these confidence trends, the Softmax function 

normalizes the indicators to generate adaptive dynamic 

weights. 12

exp( )exp( ) exp( )exp( )exp( ) exp( )      

> for ttfor back ttback ttfor back tt

TT TTT T

= += +

(17 )

When for back t tT T , the model assigns a higher weight to the 

forward LSTM output, relying more on historical evolutionary 

patterns ; w hen back for t tT T , it prioritizes the backward LSTM 

output, leveraging the more stable future context.  This achieves 

adaptive weighted fusion of bidirectional temporal features. 

2)  Adaptive Multimodal Feature Aggregation : Following 

temporal encoding via BiLSTM  networks, the temporally 

enhanced multimodal features are aggregated within  FC layers ,

where the contribution of each modality is adaptively weighted 

according to its confidence value. 

LSTM contains three core gate structures: the forget gate, the 

input gate, and the output gate.  These gates jointly control the 

retention, update, and output of temporal information. 

Each sample ( )  

> 12

..., , , Ki i i ix x x x= consists of inputs from K

distinct modalities . 

1, 2, ,iy M L is the corresponding 

intention category to be predicted, with M representing the 

total number of intention classes.  For each modality, the 

extracted features kix are fed into a modality -specific BiLSTM 

encoder k

 with learnable parameters k

 to obtain the 

corresponding hidden state ( , )k k k ki ih x

 = .

FC  layer is adopted to fuse the confidence -weighted features 

of all modalities. FC 

W and FC 

b are  the weight matrix and bias 

vector of the fully connected layer .( )  

> 2121

; ;...; FC K FC Ki ii i i iif x W C h C h C h b = + 

(18 )

where ki

C is  the confidence value . This confidence term 

weights the corresponding modal feature, thereby prioritizing 

the contributions from more reliable modalities. 

C. Multimodal Balanced Intention Prediction 

1)  Confidence -Guided Multimodal Balanced Learning :

High -confidence modalities usually dominate multimodal 

learning. This suppresses weaker complementary modalities 

and degrades model generalization. We propose a confidence -

guided multimodal balanced learning method , as shown  in  Fig. 

7. It dynamically evaluates modality contributions. It adaptively 

adjusts gradient scales. It ensures balanced optimization for all 

modalities. 

Network training adopts the gradient descent (GD) approach. 

In GD optimization framework, the output for  intent m is ( )mif x

, and the cross -entropy loss is  as follows: 11

exp( )exp( )o ( )1 l g ( )   

> i
> NiyMiimm

f xL N f x

> ==

= −  

(19 )

The parameters of FC 

W and the encoders k

 are updated as: ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( ) ( )

# ( ) 

> 1T11T()1

1 ..., ,... ,1                

> kFC
> FC FC FC ktttWNFC kktiiitkttkkkkNtikFC k ttiiktk

W W L W LW C h N f xLxL C WN f x

> 

      

> +=+=

= −   = −   = − = −    

# 

(20)

where  is the learning rate .( )FC k tW is the column of FC tW for 

modality k . The optimization of ,FC k

W

 is independent of 

other modalities, except for the loss -related term ( )

> i

L f x  .

Thus, encoders cannot adjust parameters based on mutual 

feedback between modalities. Fig.  7. Multimodal Balanced Learning Framework .

In practice, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is adopted for 

parameter updates. The update rule is  as follows :( )    

> 1
> kkkttt

g

    

> +

= − 

(21)

where ( )

> ut

g



 is an unbiased estimator ( )

> k
> kt

L

> 

 .

For each sample ix , the correct prediction score for each 

modality is computed as: ( )1

1 softmax i      

> FC MFmiC k kkimytimk

bs C MW h==

 =   +  

# 

(22)

To address the issue that high -confidence modalities usually 

dominate multimodal learning, a contribution discrepancy ratio 

is defined to measure the contribution of each modality to the 

learning objective. 1  

> tt
> iiBtiaBkkK i a

ssK



> 

=   

(23)

where tB is  SGD  mini -batch of data randomly selected at step 

t.

The gradient scaling coefficient ktq is incorporated to 

adaptively adjust the balance of modality contributions. ( )

1, if 11 tanh , if 1  

> tktkttkk

q

  =  − 

(24)

where  is a scaling  weight. When 1tk

 ,1tk

q 

suppressing the gradient updates of that modality. 

By incorporating  the gradient scaling coefficient into the 

SGD optimization method, the update rule becomes: ( )      

> 1
> kkkktttt

q g

    

> +

= −   

(25)

2)  Confidence Freezing Mechanism : To further enhance 

the learning stability of the model under extreme noisy 

conditions, a confidence -gated gradient modulation strategy is 

introduced. A confidence threshold  is set for each modality. 

If the confidence value of a modality is lower than  during 

the current iteration, its gradient updates are temporarily frozen 

in that training round. The modulation coefficient is set to 0tk

## q =

, which effectively suppresses the interference of low -

reliability modalities on model optimization. 

III.  EXPERIMENT 

In this section, comprehensive experiments are carried out to 

verify the feasibility, robustness and practicality of the 

proposed CAMF method through quantitative and qualitative 

analysis. The experiments include hardware and software 

configuration, datase t construction, ablation studies, 

comparative analysis of different methods, and human -robot 

collaborative case tests. Ablation experiments validate the 

effectiveness of the core confidence -driven fusion strategy and 

multimodal balanced learning mechanism.  Comparative 

experiments verify that the proposed method outperforms 

existing mainstream multimodal fusion algorithms in 

recognition accuracy and stability. Practical case tests further 

evaluate the environmental adaptability of the model under 

complex int erferences and its reliable performance in real -time 

human -robot collaborative tasks. 

A.  Experimental Setup 

1)  Experimental Configuration : This system aims to 

support multimodal intention recognition and accurate human -

robot collaboration, ensuring reliable multimodal data 

synchronization and meeting real -time inference computational 

requirements. A complete hardware and software configuratio n

is designed, focusing on compatibility, precision, and 

practicality in human -robot collaboration scenarios. 

For multimodal sensing, an Intel RealSense D435if depth 

camera captures high -resolution RGB and depth information. It 

is used to derive  the  scene , gaze and skeletal motion data.  The 

Hipnuc HI13R3 9 -axis IMU accurately captures the user’s hand 

motion and orientation data . The collaborative robotic platform 

consists of a UR3  6-DOF  collaborative manipulator, an Intel 

RealSense D435if, and a Robotiq 2F -85 adaptive gripper.  The 

UR3 is selected for its high precision and safety. The Robotiq 

2F -85 gripper is mounted at the end of the UR3. It can 

adaptively grasp and stably manipulate the target assembly 

components, ensuring reliable execution of assembly actions. 

The Intel Real Sense D435if is installed betwe en the robot and 

the gripper to  generate grasping scheme s.  A Lenovo PX 

workstation with an NVIDIA A6000 Ada Generation GPU 

supports real -time multimodal data processing, model inference, 

and inter -component communication. The software 

environment is built on Ubuntu 22.04, with  Robot Operating 

System 2  (ROS2 ) as the core middleware for communication 

among sensors, workstation, and robot. Time synchronization 

is implemented across all sensor streams to ensure temporal 

alignment of multimodal data. 

The workpieces used in the experiments are 3D -printed from 

CAD files provided by the Siemens Robot Learning Challenge, including baseplate, gear0, gear1, gear2, gear3, shaft 0, and 

shaft 1.These components form a standard target assembly task, 

which is used to validate the effectiveness of the proposed 

system in intention prediction accuracy and robotic 

collaboration performance.  In the experimental setup, the UR3 

is placed beside a worktable, and all assembly components are 

arranged on the table surface.  The  D435if cover s the entire 

workspace, and the user wears the IMU to track motion 

intentions.  All sensor data are transmi tted to the Lenovo PX 

workstation for multimodal fusion and intention inference.  The 

generated control commands are sent to the UR3 via ROS2 to 

execute corresponding actions. 

2)  Robot system : The core function of the UR3 is to 

perform collaborative operations based on the inferred user 

intention.  The target grasping and delivery process is illustrated 

in Fig.  8. Upon receiving the user intention command, the 

syste m uses the D435if to capture the point cloud of assembly 

components on the worktable  ①, identifies and selects the 

target workpiece via YOLOv11 with a custom -built dataset  ②,

extracts the corresponding target mask  ③, and employs 

GraspNet to generate a grasping scheme for the target 

workpiece  ④. Combined with the robotic arm’s workspace 

constraints, the optimal feasible grasping pose is determined, 

and the gripper is controlled to accomplish stable grasping. 

Fig.  8. Robotic  grasping and  delivery  process .

Fig.  9. External  torque  perception  framework. 

After successfully grasping the target workpiece, the UR3 

moves along a safe and efficient gate trajectory □1 □2 □3 □4 .

The gate trajectory is designed to avoid collisions with the 

worktable, surrounding assembly components, and the user.  To 

further guarantee collaborative safety during motion execution, 

the robot adopts an external  torque  perception strategy as an 

auxiliary safety measure,  as shown in Fig. 9. 

External  torque  information is estimated and mapped from 

the joint torque obtained by the momentum observer via the 

robot Jacobian matrix. The robot dynamic model derived via 

the Newton -Euler method serves as the foundation for external 

torque estimation: ( ) ( , ) ( ) m eM q q C q q q g q 

 + + = + 

(26 )

where , ,q q q   are  the  joint  position, velocity, and acceleration .( ) M q 

is  the symmetric positive definite inertia matrix. ( , )C q q 

is the centrifugal and Coriolis matrix .( ) g q  is  the 

gravity vector. m tK I 

= is the motor torque ,tK is  torque –

current constant and I is  joint motor current .e

 is  the total 

external torque .

Design the first -order momentum observer. Continuously 

compare the actual generalized momentum ( ) Q M q q =  with 

the observer -estimated momentum Q− , and use a positive -

definite gain matrix K to construct a feedback term that 

estimates the true external disturbance torque. 

# ( )

> 0

( , ) ( ) TTe

Q C q q q g q rr K Q dt Q

 

> −

= − − = + −  

  

(27 )

By monitoring external contact torque in real time, the robot 

can promptly trigger collision avoidance or emergency stop 

responses when unexpected human -robot contact occurs during 

trajectory execution . The UR3 then transports the target 

workpiece along the planned trajectory to the user’s operation 

space.  The delivery position enables the user to perform 

subsequent assembly operations.  By completing the entire 

pipeline from intention recognition, target grasping to 

workpiece delivery, the robotic arm effectively achieves 

accurate, safe, and efficient human -robot collaborative 

assembly. 

3)  Dataset Construction : To evaluate our proposed 

method, we invited  five  test participants  to engage in the 

experiment, conducting ten trials for each component , as shown 

in Fig. 10(a) . Prior to formal data acquisition, they engaged in 

a training session to familiarize themselves with the techniques 

required for operating the system.  The data acquisition 

procedure consists of three sequential stages , as shown in Fig. 

10( b). In S1, each test participant keeps in an initial standby 

state while waiting for the workpiece‑picking instruction. In S2, 

upon receiving the instruction, the participant starts motion with 

synchronized sensor data acquisition, approaches the target 

workpi ece via coordinated gaze, body and hand movement, and 

adjusts trajectory adaptively. In S3, the test participant 

completes the workpiece‑picking action naturally.  All test 

participants perform the procedure naturally without extra 

intervention, consistent with real -world human operation 

patterns. Data from each participant are randomly divided into 

training and test sets at an 8:2 ratio, with 80% for model training 

and 20% for performance evaluation. Fig.  10 . Experimental  Setup for  Dataset  Construction . (a)  Test 

participants . (b)  Data acquisition procedure .

B. Ablation Studies 

1)  Modal Quantity Comparison Results : This subsection 

investigates the performance of human intention recognition 

across different modality combinations. The confusion matrices 

in Fig. 11 reveal that multimodal approaches achieve far better 

results than unimodal ones. Scene and gaze modalities exert 

limited  effects on recognition performance. We further conduct 

quantitative evaluation adopting accuracy, F1 score and Kappa 

coefficient as evaluation metrics to compare the recognition 

capability of different modality combinations. The 

corresponding experimental  results are summarized in Table  I.

Fig.  11 . Confusion Matrices of Different Modality 

Combinations .

TABLE I 

THE RESULTS OF  DIFFERENT  MODALITY  COMBINATIONS                               

> Modalit yAccuracy F1 score Kappa
> Scene 37.99% 31.78 %25.1 2%
> Gaze 43.49 %43.54 %32.16 %
> Skeletal 75.51 %76.05 %70.47 %
> Hand 72.93 %72.54 %67.50 %
> Skeletal +Hand 78.83 %78.90 %74.54 %
> Gaze +Skeletal +Hand 82.29 %82. 10 %82.21 %
> Fusion 92.42 %92.37 %91.09 %

The experimental results show that unimodal methods 

deliver poor overall performance in intention recognition. The 

scene modality achieves the lowest results with three metrics of 

37.99%, 31.78% and 25.12%, and the gaze modality also 

obtains low recognitio n accuracy. By comparison, the skeletal 

motion and hand motion modalities perform better, with 

accuracy of 75.51% and 72.93% respectively. The recognition 

performance keeps improving as more modalities are 

integrated. The combination of skeletal and hand motion 

outperforms all other two -modal schemes, with its accuracy 3% 

higher than that of the best unimodal method. The three -modal 

scheme integrating gaze, skeletal and hand motion achieves the 

best performance among its counterparts, raising the accuracy 

by another 7%. The proposed multimodal fusion method 

obtains the optimal comprehensive performance, with three 

metrics reaching 93.42%, 93.37% and 92.09%. Its accuracy is 

improved by 18%, and it also outperforms all other approaches 

in F1 score and Kappa c oefficient. In conclusion, the above 

experimental results fully demonstrate that the multimodal 

fusion strategy can exploit the complementary strengths of 

different sensing modalities and greatly improve the accuracy 

of human intention understanding in hum an -robot 

collaboration. 

2)  Confidence -Based Multimodal Fusion Result :

Confidence of different modalities exhibit significant dynamics 

when the same action is performed by different participants, as 

shown in Fig. 12. 

Fig.  12 . Confidence of Different Modalities Across 

Participants. 

Confidence heatmaps indicate that modality confidence 

varies greatly across participants and time steps. The sens e

modality shows large individual differences, the gaze modality 

delivers low and unstable confidence for some participants, and 

the skeletal motion modality suffers from severe fluctuations. 

By comparison, the hand motion modality maintains relatively 

stab le performance. Such discrepancies verify the rationality of 

adopting confidence -aware strategies to adaptively adjust 

fusion weights.  We further perform experiments to evaluate the 

effectiveness of key confidence -related modules in CAMF . We 

adopt Accuracy, F1 score and Standard Deviation (STDEV) as 

evaluation metrics , the results  are  shown  in Table  II .

TABLE  II 

THE RESULTS OF  DIFFERENT  CONFIDENCE -BASED  FUSION 

SCHEMES                 

> Methods Accuracy F1 score STDEV
> Baseline 90.09% 89.83% 0.0427
> w/o FC Confidence Weighting 85.96% 85.72% 0.0509
> w/o BiLSTM Confidence Trend 90.30 %90.52 %0.0340
> CAMF (Ours) 91.86% 91.84% 0.01 82

Experimental results show that the baseline adopts standard 

FC and BiLSTM  networks without confidence mechanisms, 

with an accuracy of 90.09%, an F1 score of 89.83% and a standard deviation of 0.0427. Our CAMF model achieves the 

best performance, with 1.7% higher accuracy, 2.0% higher F1 

score and a 57.3% lower standard deviation than the baseline. 

Removing the BiLSTM confidence trend module leads to a 

1.56% accuracy drop a nd a 0.0158 rise in standard deviation. 

The recognition performance declines.  Removing the FC 

confidence weighting module causes a 5.9% accuracy decline, 

and this variant performs worse than both the CAMF and the 

baseline.  It proves that the BiLSTM confidence trend module 

alone cannot maintain performance and even underperforms the 

baseline, so the two modules must cooperate effectively.  To 

evaluate robustness against noise, we compare accuracy across 

different noisy scenarios in Fig . 13. 

Fig.  13 . Accuracy  under Different Noise Scenarios 

Under both visual and IMU noise conditions, CAMF 

outperforms its two ablated variants with clear margins. 

Compared to the noiseless setting, CAMF’s accuracy drops by 

only 8% under visual noise and 3% under IMU noise.  In 

contrast, removing the BiLSTM confidence trend leads to 

accuracy drops of 13% under visual noise and 10% under IMU 

noise. Removing the FC confidence weighting results in 11% 

and 5% drops.  These results confirm that both confidence -

aware modules are critical to maintaining robustness against 

noisy inputs. 

3)  Balanced Multimodal Learning Mechanism : The 

balanced multimodal learning mechanism introduces scaling 

weights to adaptively adjust gradient scales and dynamically 

regulate the contribution of each modality during training, so as 

to alleviate performance bias across modalities. We conduct 

experim ents with different scaling weight configurations. The 

prediction scores of individual modalities are presented in Fig. 

14.  And w e evaluate model performance in terms of accuracy, 

mean average precision (mAP), mean F1 score and F1 standard 

deviation, the results are summarized in Table  III .

The scaling weight influences the learning dynamics of each 

modality. When 0

= without modality balancing, the gaze 

modality dominates the training process, while the skeletal 

motion modality and hand motion modality are suppressed, 

leading to severe cross -modal performance imbalance. As the 

scaling weight increases to the optimal s etting, the prediction 

scores of all modalities tend to become balanced. Weak 

modalities receive sufficient optimization, while strong 

modalities no longer overly dominate the learning process. 

The optimal scaling weight yields the best performance with 

accuracy 91.72%, mAP 97.50%, mean F1 0.9172, and F1 std 

0.0136. This combination indicates high recognition precision 

and stable performance across categories. In contrast, 

inappropriate scaling leads to lower accuracy, reduced mAP, 

and higher F1 std, reflecting weaker precision and poorer 

consistency. These results confirm that the balanced 

multimodal learning mechanism  effectively mitigates cross -

modal bias for more robust fusion. 

Fig.  14 . Modality Prediction Scores  under Different Scaling 

Weights 

TABLE  III 

THE RESULTS OF  DIFFERENT  SCALING  WEIGHTS                   

> Scaling Weight Accuracy mAP F1 mean F1 std 0.0
> =
> 91.52 %97.26% 0. 9156 0.0209 0.5
> =
> 91.66 %97.18% 0. 9165 0.0141 1.0
> =
> 91.72 %97.50% 0. 9172 0.0136 2.0
> =
> 90.71 %96.99% 0. 9072 0.0212

C. Method Comparison Results 

In order to validate the effectiveness of our method,  we

compare the proposed CAMF with a range of mainstream and 

advanced multimodal fusion methods, including  Dempster -

Shafer evidence theory  (DS),  Independent  Opinion Pool  (IOP), 

Multimodal Adaptation Gate based Transformer  (Transformer ),

Evidential Conflict -guided Late Fusion  (ECoLaF),  Hybrid 

Recurrent Neural Network  (HRNN),  Two -Step  Long Short -

Term Memory (TSLSTM), and  Prototypical Modal Rebalance 

(PMR).  The comparison results are presented in Table  IV .

TABLE  IV 

COMPARISON  RESULTS OF  DIFFERENT  METHODS                              

> Methods Accuracy F1 score STDEV
> DS [39 ]76 .19 %75 .52 %0.0722
> IOP [18 ]87 .92 %87 .61 %0.0293
> Transformer [ 40 ]80.94% 80.41% 0.0506
> ECoLaF [ 41 ]81 .34 %81 .13 %0.0503
> HRNN [ 42 ]86 .57 %86 .21 %0.0348
> TSLSTM [ 43 ]87.18% 86 .93 %0.0407
> PMR [ 12 ]87 .52 %87 .52 %0.0322
> CAMF (Ours) 91.86% 91.84% 0. 0126

DS achieves the worst overall performance. It obtains an 

accuracy of 76.19%, an F1 score of 75.52%, and a high standard 

deviation of 0.0722. This method considers the collaboration 

and conflict relationships between modalities. However, it 

adopts fixed fus ion rules. It cannot dynamically evaluate data 

quality and is easily disturbed by complex multimodal inputs, leading to low recognition accuracy. Transformer and ECoLaF 

achieve moderate performance, with accuracies of 80.94% and 

81.34%, respectively. Both methods yield standard deviations 

higher than 0.05. Transformer integrates a multimodal 

adaptation gate to ad just internal model representations 

dynamically. Still, it lacks in -depth cross -modal feature 

learning and shows limited task adaptability. ECoLaF can 

correct model outputs according to modal conflicts. 

Nevertheless, it is a decision -level late fusion meth od and fails 

to extract underlying cross -modal correlation features. IOP, 

HRNN, TSLSTM and PMR achieve competitive results, with 

accuracies ranging from 86.57% to 87.92%. IOP fuses 

multimodal classification probabilities through independent 

opinion pool an d Bayesian strategies to reduce prediction 

uncertainty. It only implements simple fusion at the result level. 

HRNN adopts a hybrid recurrent network to extract temporal 

and shallow cross -modal features effectively. However, it treats 

all modalities equally  and ignores real -time modal confidence 

evaluation. TSLSTM performs multi -step intention prediction 

and has advantages in temporal modeling. It still lacks a 

dynamic modal adjustment mechanism. PMR relieves the 

modality imbalance problem in multimodal lear ning. It only 

optimizes the training stage and cannot adapt fusion strategies 

according to real -time data quality during inference. The 

proposed CAMF achieves the optimal performance among all 

methods. It reaches an accuracy of 91.86% and an F1 score of 

91 .84%, with a low standard deviation of 0.0126. Benefiting 

from the confidence -aware mechanism, CAMF dynamically 

evaluates modal reliability and optimizes fusion weights 

adaptively. It fully explores the complementary properties of 

multimodal data and achie ves superior recognition 

performance. 

To further evaluate the generalization capability of the 

proposed method, data from five participants are split for 

experiments. Data of four participants are used for training, and 

data of the remaining one for testing. Performance across 

different workpi ece categories is shown in Fig. 15. Results 

under various video frame ratios are given in Fig. 16. 

Fig.  15 . Accuracy  Comparison  Across  Different Workpiece 

Categories. 

Fig.  16 . The  Results of Different Video Frame Ratios. (a) 

Actions under different video frame ratios . (b)  Accuracy 

comparison .

CAMF achieves superior overall performance across all 

workpiece categories, maintaining consistently high and 

balanced recognition accuracy for both gear and shaft tasks. Its 

accuracy exceeds 73% in most categories, peaking at 93%. In 

contrast, DS exhibits  significant performance fluctuations, with 

accuracy varying widely between 8% and 83%, showing severe 

deficiencies on certain workpiece types. Transformer performs 

poorly overall, while ECoLaF delivers the most stable results 

but at a generally low accura cy level. The remaining methods 

show performance comparable to CAMF but remain 

consistently inferior across the board.  At different video frame 

ratios, CAMF achieves competitive accuracy across all settings, 

with values of 35%, 5 2%, 6 7%, 8 2% and 89%. Its performance 

rises steadily as the number of valid frames increases. 

Transformer has low overall accuracy yet performs well at low 

frame ratios, as it relies on basic visual features and makes full 

use of shallow information from limited fram es. PMR shows 

the fastest accuracy growth, indicating its strong capability to 

extract temporal features from consecutive frames. The results 

demonstrate that the proposed method delivers better overall 

performance and stronger generalization across divers e

workpieces and varying input conditions. 

D. Case Study 

To verify the practicability and adaptability of CAMF in 

realistic complex workshop scenarios, we conduct two groups 

of industrial case experiments in this  subsection . We first 

simulate common interferences such as low light and human 

occlusion to evaluate the  model's environmental adaptabilit y.

Then we implement a complete human -robot collaborative 

assembly workflow to validate the performance of the method 

in real -time intention recognition and robotic cooperative tasks. 

This set of tests adopts the pre -trained model, with no 

supplementary training on occlusion datasets. We establish four 

typical interference conditions including low light, upper body 

occlusion, face occlusion and full body occlusion, as illustrated 

in Fig . 17. Specifically, the low  light environment is generated 

by directly lowering the brightness of original RGB images, and 

the corresponding quantitative results under various 

interferences are summarized in Table  V.Fig.  17. Performance test under different interference 

conditions.  (a) Low  light scenario. (b) Upper body occlusion. 

(c) Face occlusion. (d) Full  body occlusion. 

TABLE  V

THE RESULTS OF  DIFFERENT  INTERFERENCE  CONDITIONS                    

> Interference Scenario Accuracy F1 score STDEV
> No interference 87.86 %88.03 %0.0 435
> Low light scenario 83.58 %83.76 %0.0 535
> Upper body occlusion 43.17 %36.49 %0. 2994
> Face occlusion 77.14 %77.73 %0. 1035
> Full body occlusion 30.00 %20.15 %0. 3274

Experimental results indicate that external interferences 

impair recognition performance to different extents. The model 

achieves an accuracy of 87.86%, an F1 score of 88.03% and a 

standard deviation of 0.0435 under normal conditions. The 

accuracy drops by  4% in the low  light environment. It maintains 

acceptable performance under face occlusion with an 11 %

accuracy decline, which proves that the proposed method can 

handle partial occlusion effectively. The performance drops 

sharply to an accuracy of 43.17% under upper body occlusion, 

and full body occlusion produces the lowest accuracy at 

30.00%. Effective human features are almost completely lost 

under such extreme occlusion, and this is also a challenge for 

all visual recog nition methods. 

We conduct a complete human -robot collaborative assembly 

test to evaluate the application of the proposed CAMF method 

in real -world task scenarios. The full process includes user 

intention expression, intention recognition, robotic grasping 

and delivery. T he sequential stages of the task are illustrated in 

Fig. 18. 

The sequential snapshots show the complete collaborative 

manipulation process. Steps  (1) to  (4) record the user's intention 

expression, and the system recognizes the target workpiece at 

Step  (4). Steps  (5)  and  (6) present the grasping phase: the 

system uses YOLOv11 with a custom -built dataset for target 

detection, extracts the target mask, and adopts GraspNet to 

generate grasping schemes. It selects the optimal grasp pose 

under UR3 workspace constraints to realize  stable picking. 

Steps  (7) to  (11 ) show workpiece delivery, where the UR3 

moves along the safe gate trajectory to prevent collisions. The 

robot returns to its home position at Step  (12 ) to end the task. 

In line with prior tests on video frame ratios, the robot starts 

working when the user's motion reaches 60% to 80%, enabling 

proactive collaboration. 

Fig.  18 . Human -Robot Collaborative Manipulation Process Timeline 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

A.  Results Discussion 

Experimental results show that the proposed CAMF achieves 

excellent performance and environmental adaptability in 

human -robot intention recognition. It combines multiple 

modalities to make up for the insufficient feature information 

of single modalities an d improves recognition accuracy. Its 

confidence trend -driven fusion and multimodal balanced 

learning assess modal reliability in real time, adjust fusion 

weights and training gradients, and reduce the impact of low -

quality data. Compared with other mainstr eam methods, CAMF 

delivers higher accuracy and smaller deviation, and runs stably 

on different workpieces and motion ratios. It also maintains 

reliable performance under mild interference, which adapts 

well to complex industrial environments. However, this  method 

still has limitations. Extreme upper -body or full -body occlusion 

causes massive loss of valid features and a sharp drop in modal 

confidence, leading to severe performance degradation. 

Moreover, the balanced learning mechanism only optimizes 

modal b ias during training. It fails to respond rapidly to sudden 

modal failure in extreme scenarios and may result in occasional 

recognition errors. 

B. System Evaluation 

The constructed human -robot collaboration system exhibits 

good practicability and industrial adaptability. It integrates visual 

scene, gaze, skeletal motion, and hand inertial sensing data to 

comprehensively capture human collaborative intentions and 

suppo rt high -precision active human -robot collaboration. The 

hardware platform adopts depth cameras and IMU sensors for 

synchronous multimodal acquisition, and cooperates with the 

UR3 robotic arm and adaptive gripper to steadily complete target 

detection , workp iece grasping, and safe delivery. The software 

framework based on ROS2 realizes real -time data transmission 

among sensors, workstations and robots, and improves the fluency and efficiency of human -robot cooperation through the adaptive 

confidence fusion strategy. Nevertheless, this system still has 

engineering limitations. It is only validated on standard assembly 

parts with relatively single scenarios, lacking sufficient 

ver ification in tasks with special -shaped workpieces, dynamic 

disturbances and multi -stage processes, which limits its overall 

application scope. Moreover, the current model only supports 

offline training and fixed -parameter inference without online 

adaptive  optimization, making it difficult to adapt to variable 

operating habits and dynamic industrial environments. 

C. Future Work 

To address the limitations of this study, we will optimize the 

algorithm and add feature compensation functions to improve 

recognition performance and response speed under strong 

interference. We will also equip the system with online learning 

to adjust mo del parameters in real time for different users and 

changing working conditions. Besides, we will apply the 

multimodal fusion method to robot motion control and interface 

interaction tasks to expand its application potential and promote 

practical deploymen t in industrial scenarios. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

A confidence -aware multimodal fusion framework (CAMF) 

is developed to facilitate intelligent human -robot collaboration 

in industrial assembly scenarios. This work combines multiple 

types of sensing information to comprehensively perceive 

human behaviors, a nd adopts  BiLSTM  to model temporal 

dependencies within continuous operation sequences. 

Targeting the dynamic changes and noise disturbance of 

different data sources, confidence assessment modules are 

introduced to conduct adaptive feature fusion. Meanwhile , a set 

of optimized learning strategies are designed to balance the 

contribution of each modality during training and restrain the 

adverse impact of unreliable data. 

The proposed framework organically integrates dynamic 

fusion rules and improved training mechanisms. It can adapt to 

varying working conditions and mitigate the defects caused by 

static fusion schemes and imbalanced multimodal learning. In 

real -world colla borative operations, the system is able to 

perceive human intentions and coordinate robotic actions 

accordingly. It exhibits good environmental adaptability and 

steady running performance when confronted with common 

industrial disturbances. The overall per formance validates that 

this solution is well suited for practical industrial human -robot 

interaction tasks, and provides a feasible reference for the 

design of robust multimodal perception systems in similar 

application scenarios. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  L. Pé rez, S. Rodrí guez -Jimé nez, N. Rodrí guez, R. Usamentiaga, D. F. 

García, and L. Wang, “Symbiotic human –robot collaborative approach for 

increased productivity and enhanced safety in the aerospace manufacturing 

industry,”  Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. , vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 851 –863, Jan. 

2020. 

[2]  Q. Wang, H. Liu, F. Ore, L. Wang, J. B. Hauge, and S. Meijer, “Multi -actor 

perspectives on human robotic collaboration implementation in the heavy 

automotive manufacturing industry —A Swedish case study,”  Technol. Soc. ,

vol. 72, Art. no. 102165, Oct. 2023. 

[3]  M. Marinelli, “From Industry 4.0 to Construction 5.0: Exploring the path 

towards human –robot collaboration in construction,”  Systems , vol. 11, no. 

3, Art. no. 152, Mar. 2023. 

[4]  A. Baratta, A. Cimino, M. G. Gnoni, and F. Longo, “Human robot 

collaboration in industry 4.0: a literature review,”  Procedia Comput. Sci. ,

vol. 217, pp. 1887 –1895, 2023. 

[5]  P. Zheng, S. Li, J. Fan, C. Li, and L. Wang, “A collaborative intelligence -

based approach for handling human -robot collaboration uncertainties,” 

CIRP Ann. , vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 1 –4, 2023. 

[6]  A. K. Inkulu, M. R. Bahubalendruni, A. Dara, and S. K., “Challenges and 

opportunities in human robot collaboration context of Industry 4.0 —a state 

of the art review,”  Ind. Robot , vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 226 –239, 2022. 

[7]  S. S. Kumar, S. R. Kumar, and G. Ramesh, “From Industry 4.0 to 5.0: 

Enriching manufacturing excellence through Human –Robot interaction 

and technological empowerment,” in  Intelligent Systems and Industrial 

Internet of Things for Sustainable Development , Chapman and Hall/CRC, 

2024, pp. 24 –51. 

[8]  H. Su, W. Qi, J. Chen, C. Yang, J. Sandoval, and M. A. Laribi, “Recent 

advancements in multimodal human –robot interaction,”  Front. 

Neurorobot. , vol. 17, Art. no. 1084000, 2023. 

[9]  T. Wang, P. Zheng, S. Li, and L. Wang, “Multimodal human –robot 

interaction for human -centric smart manufacturing: a survey,”  Adv. Intell. 

Syst. , vol. 6, no. 3, Art. no. 2300359, 2024. 

[10] T. Xue, W. Wang, J. Ma, W. Liu, Z. Pan, and M. Han, “Progress and 

prospects of multimodal fusion methods in physical human –robot 

interaction: A review,”  IEEE Sens. J. , vol. 20, no. 18, pp. 10355 –10370, 

2020. 

[11] X. Peng, Y. Wei, A. Deng, D. Wang, and D. Hu, “Balanced multimodal 

learning via on -the -fly gradient modulation,” in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. 

Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2022, pp. 8238 –8247. 

[12] Y. Fan, W. Xu, H. Wang, J. Wang, and S. Guo, “PMR: Prototypical modal 

rebalance for multimodal learning,” in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. 

Pattern Recognit. , 2023, pp. 20029 –20038. 

[13] H. Liu, T. Fang, T. Zhou, and L. Wang, “Towards robust human -robot 

collaborative manufacturing: Multimodal fusion,”  IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 

74762 –74771, 2018. 

[14] S. Liu, L. Wang, and X. V. Wang, “Function block -based multimodal 

control for symbiotic human –robot collaborative assembly,”  J. Manuf. Sci. 

Eng. , vol. 143, no. 9, p p. 091001, Sep. 2021. 

[15] J. Duan, Y. Fang, Q. Zhang, and J. Qin, “HRC for dual -robot intelligent 

assembly system based on multimodal perception,”  in  Proc. Inst. Mech. 

Eng. Part B J. Eng. Manuf. , vol. 238, no. 4, pp. 562 –576, 2024. 

[16] S. Rafael, “The contribution of early multimodal data fusion for 

subjectivity in HCI,” in  2021 16th Iberian Conf. Inf. Syst. Technol. (CISTI) ,

2021, pp. 1 –6. 

[17] X. Luo et al. , “Noise -augmented multi -modal entity alignment with 

confidence -based dynamic fusion,”  Sci. China Inf. Sci. , to be published, 

2025. 

[18] S. Trick, D. Koert, J. Peters, and C. A. Rothkopf, “Multimodal uncertainty 

reduction for intention recognition in human -robot interaction,” in  2019 

IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) , 2019, pp. 7009 –7016. 

[19] S. Jiang  et al. , “A novel human -in -the -loop multimodal intention fusion 

method for human -robot interaction,”  IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. , to be 

published, 2025. 

[20] Y. Yang, Y. Q. Yang, G. Ren, and B. G. Yu, “Hierarchically trusted 

evidential fusion method with consistency learning for multimodal 

language understanding,”  Knowl. -Based Syst. , vol. 312, Art. no. 113164, 

2025. 

[21] Z. Han, F. Yang, J. Huang, C. Zhang, and J. Yao, “Multimodal dynamics: 

Dynamical fusion for trustworthy multimodal classification,” in  Proc. 

IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2022, pp. 20707 –20717. 

[22] X. Zhao  et al. , “Learning multimodal confidence for intention recognition 

in human -robot interaction,”  IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , to be published, 

2024. 

[23] J. Martinez, M. J. Black, and J. Romero, “On human motion prediction 

using recurrent neural networks,” in  Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern 

Recognit. (CVPR) , 2017, pp. 4674 –4683. 

[24] E. Aksan, M. Kaufmann, and O. Hilliges, “Structured prediction helps 3D 

human motion modelling,” in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. 

(ICCV) , Oct. 2019, pp. 7144 –7153. 

[25] X. Liu, J. Yin, J. Liu, P. Ding, J. Liu, and H. Liu, “TrajectoryCNN: A new 

spatio -temporal feature learning network for human motion prediction,” 

IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2133 –2146, 

Jun. 2021. [26] C. Zhong, L. Hu, Z. Zhang, Y. Ye, and S. Xia, “Spatio -temporal gating 

adjacency GCN for human motion prediction,” in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. 

Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2022, pp. 6437 –6446. 

[27] E. Barsoum, J. Kender, and Z. Liu, “HP -GAN: Probabilistic 3D human 

motion prediction via GAN,” in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. 

Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW) , Jun. 2018, pp. 14 18 –14 27 

[28] S. Aliakbarian, F. Sadat Saleh, M. Salzmann, L. Petersson, and S. Gould, 

“A stochastic conditioning scheme for diverse human motion prediction,” 

in  Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2020, 

pp. 5222 –5231. 

[29] E. Aksan, M. Kaufmann, P. Cao, and O. Hilliges, “A spatio -temporal 

transformer for 3D human motion prediction,” in  Proc. Int. Conf. 3D Vis. 

(3DV) , Dec. 2021, pp. 565 –574. 

[30] L. Chen, R. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Hou, Q. Zhang, and D. Zhou, “MSTP -Net: 

Multiscale spatio -temporal parallel networks for human motion prediction,” 

IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. , vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3318 –3331, Feb. 2023. 

[31] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short -term memory,”  Neural 

Comput. , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735 –1780, Nov. 1997. 

[32] R. Chellali, “Predicting arm movements: A multi -variate LSTM -based 

approach for human -robot hand clapping games,” in  2018 27th IEEE Int. 

Symp. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (RO -MAN) , Aug. 2018, pp. 1137 –

1142. 

[33] Z. Liu, Q. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, and J. Chen, “Deep learning -based 

human motion prediction considering context awareness for human -robot 

collaboration in manufacturing,”  Procedia CIRP , vol. 83, pp. 272 –278, 

2019. 

[34] C. Ma  et al., “A bi -directional LSTM network for estimating continuous 

upper limb movement from surface electromyography,”  IEEE Robot. 

Autom. Lett. , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 7217 –7224, 2021. 

[35] B. Wen, W. Yang, J. Kautz and S. Birchfield, "FoundationPose: Unified 

6D Pose Estimation and Tracking of Novel Objects,"  in  Proc. IEEE Conf. 

Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 17868 -17879 .

[36] F. Ryan, A. Bati, S. Lee, D. Bolya, J. Hoffman and J. M. Rehg, "Gaze -LLE: 

Gaze Target Estimation via Large -Scale Learned Encoders,"  in  Proc. IEEE 

Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 28874 -28884 .

[37] S.  Yan, Y. Xiong  and  D.  Lin,  “Spatial temporal graph convolutional 

networks for skeleton -based action recognition ,”  in Proc . AAAI conf . Artif .

Intel ., vol. 32,  no. 1 , Apr . 2018. 

[38] S. Zhang, D. Zheng, X.  Hu  and  M.  Yang,  “Bidirectional Long Short -Term 

Memory Networks for Relation Classification ,”  in  Proc. Pac. Asia Conf. 

Lang. Inf. Comput. , 2015. 

[39] Z. Jiao, “Research on multimodal human -computer interaction technology 

based on audiovisual fusion,” in  Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Comput. Signal 

Process. (ICSP) , 2022, pp. 1378 –1381. 

[40] W. Rahman, M. K. Hasan, S. Lee, A. B. Zadeh, C. Mao, L. P. Morency, 

and E. Hoque, “Integrating multimodal information in large pretrained 

transformers,” in  Proc. 58th Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. (ACL) ,

Jul. 2020, pp. 2359 –2369. 

[41] L. Deregnaucourt, H. Laghmara, A. Lechervy, and S. Ainouz, “A Conflict -

Guided Evidential Multimodal Fusion for Semantic Segmentation,” in  Proc. 

IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV) , Feb. 2025, pp. 1373 –

1382. 

[42] X. Gao, L. Yan, G. Wang, and C. Gerada, “Hybrid recurrent neural network 

architecture -based intention recognition for human –robot collaboration,” 

IEEE Trans. Cybern. , vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1578 –1586, 2021. 

[43] P. U. Ravva, P. Kullu, M. F. Abrar, and R. L. Barmaki, “A Machine 

Learning Approach for Predicting Upper Limb Motion Intentions with 

Multimodal Data in Virtual Reality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13023, 

2024.