Title: Towards Interaction Regulation from Human Feedback via Free Energy Minimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.18853v1

Published Time: Thu, 17 Sep 2026 01:39:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Towards Interaction Regulation from Human Feedback via Free Energy Minimization 

M. Paula Diaz Monfort 1,* , Cinzia Tomaselli 1,* , Michael Richardson 2,† , Giovanni Russo 3,† 

Abstract — A central challenge across control and learning is the design of mechanisms regulating the interactions between humans and autonomous agents. Inspired by the free energy principle from computational neuroscience, we introduce acontrol-theoretical framework to integrate human preferences online into an agent policy. We turn the framework into an open control architecture and validate our approach using a human-in-the-loop experimental testbed involving a rover navigating via onboard sensing. The human, remotely located and equipped with virtual reality headsets, shares the same sensory information as the rover. Human preferences are provided to the rover via gestures which introduce both cooperative and competitive interactions between the agent goal and the preferences. The experiments show that interactions are regulated, validating the proposed approach. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A popular paradigm to design autonomous agents involves tuning the agent policy using information from humans. This paradigm is often associated with reinforcement learn-ing from human feedback, where human preferences are typically used offline to learn reward models that are then optimized by the agent [1]. In contrast, in control, it is often necessary to incorporate human inputs in real time during policy execution, rather than through an offline process. In this context, a key challenge is the design of interaction regulation mechanisms to incorporate online information arising from humans in a policy that is being executed by an autonomous agent. We introduce a control-theoretical framework to tackle this challenge and turn the framework into a control architecture. The framework relies on the min-imization of the variational free energy, a central theme in, e.g., theoretical neuroscience [2], establishing a link between the free energy principle (FEP) and a certainty-equivalent adaptive optimal control scheme in the probability space. Our openly available architecture enables online integration of a policy generated by human preferences with the agent policy. The approach is experimentally validated on a testbed involving rovers autonomously navigating using onboard sensory information. While the robot executes its policy, a remote human, which receives the same sensory input via a virtual reality (VR) headset, conveys preferences to the robot through gestures. These preferences may induce cooperative or competitive interactions with the rover’s goal. Experiments demonstrate that preferences are effectively integrated into the rover’s policy, confirming the effectiveness of the interaction regulation mechanism.          

> 1Scuola Superiore Meridionale, Napoli, Italy, 2Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 3University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy. *Joint first.
> †Joint last. Corresponding:

c.tomaselli@ssmeridionale.it giovarusso@unisa.it 

The minimization of the variational free energy offers a unifying account across learning [3], [4], control [5], [6], [7], [8], Schr¨ odinger bridges [9], [10], and neuroscience [11]. Popular learning and control frameworks involve finding optimal policies by minimizing a free energy functional (see Sec. II for the definition). The resulting optimal solution benefits, among other desirable properties, from implicit and explicit robustness guarantees [12]. Policy computation via free energy minimization is increasingly seen as an appealing framework to design modular control architectures, often leveraging motor control tasks as benchmarks [13], [14]. Beyond modular architectures, this free energy framework is broadly recognized as a promising approach to design agents capable of performing complex tasks in largely uncertain environments. We refer to [15], [16] for a broader perspec-tive, and survey, on the use of free energy minimization as a computational model to control autonomous agents. Our work is also related to the rich body of literature on cyber-physical systems with humans in the loop [17], [18], [19] to adaptive optimal control, see, e.g., [20] for a survey, and to information design for control [21], [22]. 

Contributions. We propose and validate a control-theoretic framework for interaction regulation. The framework in-tegrates online human preferences into an agent’s policy, allowing for both cooperative and competitive interactions. Grounded in variational free-energy minimization, the inte-gration problem is formulated as optimal control in prob-ability space, linking the FEP to an infinite-dimensional certainty-equivalent adaptive optimal control scheme. The resulting architecture integrates human and agent generated policies online and accommodates nonlinear, non-stationary, and stochastic dynamics and policies. We validate the ap-proach experimentally through a virtual-reality interface in which a human intermittently communicates gesture-based preferences to a remotely located rover performing a lane-following task using onboard sensing. The results show that the proposed approach effectively incorporates human inputs into the rover’s policy. Code, hardware details, experimental settings and a video are openly available at https:// tinyurl.com/ae52ereu .II. B ACKGROUND 

We denote sets and operators by calligraphic characters, vectors by bold , and the identity matrix of dimension N

by IN . We let K be either R or Z. A random variable is denoted by V and its realization is v. We denote the probability mass function (pmf, if the variable is discrete) or probability density function (pdf, for continuous random arXiv:2609.18853v1 [eess.SY] 16 Sep 2026 variables) by p(v). We also let D be the convex set of pdfs (pmfs). The expectation of a function h(⋅) with respect to (w.r.t) the continuous random variable V is Ep[h(v)] ∶= ∫supp p h(v) p(v) dv, with supp p being the (compact) sup-port of p(v). If V is discrete, the integral is replaced by a sum. Whenever it is clear from the context we do not explicitly highlight the support in the integrals/sums. The joint pmf of v1 and v2 is p(v1, v2) and the conditional pdf/pmf of v1 w.r.t. v2 is p (v1 ∣ v2). Given two pdfs/pmfs, 

p(v) and q(v), we say that p(v) is absolutely continuous w.r.t. q(v) if supp p ⊆ supp q. We denote this by writing p ≪

q. The Kullback–Leibler divergence between p(v) and q(v)

is DKL (p(v) ∣∣ q(v)) ∶= ∫ supp p p(v) log ( p(v) 

> q(v)

) dv, if V is continuous. The integral is replaced by a summation when V

is discrete. The divergence quantifies the discrepancy of the pair p(v), q(v); DKL (p(v) ∣∣ q(v)) is non-negative, finite only if p ≪ q and DKL (p(v) ∣∣ q(v)) = 0 if and only if 

p = q almost everywhere [23]. 

A. Minimization of the Variational Free Energy 

Given two pdfs/pmfs, p(v) and q(v), and a loss function, 

l(⋅) , the variational free energy is defined as, see, e.g., [24], 

F( p(v), q (v)) ∶= DKL (p(v) ∣∣ q(v)) + Ep [l(V)] . (1) The first term in (1) is also known as statistical complexity and q(v) is often termed as generative/time-series model. Several inference, learning and control problems involve (see Remark III.2) minimizing F(⋅ , ⋅) w.r.t. its first argument. The following result summarizes key properties of the resulting optimization problem. The properties can be found under different technical conditions in, e.g., [25], [26], [5], [27]. 

Lemma II.1. Given q(v), consider 

min p(v)∈D F( p(v), q (v)) , (2) 

with F(⋅ , ⋅) defined in (1) . Then: (i) the problem is convex; (ii) the optimal solution is p∗(v) = q(v) exp (− l(v)) ∫ q(v) exp (− l(v)) dv ; (iii) the optimal value is − log ∫ q(v) exp (− l(v)) dv.

Remark II.1. Lemma II.1 implies that the optimal solution of the problem in (2) is a pdf with an exponential kernel twisting the generative model [25]. For discrete variables, the integral in the solution becomes a sum. 

Remark II.2. Minimizing the KL divergence in (1) amounts to minimizing the discrepancy between p(v) and q(v). The KL divergence in the objective can be thought of as a regu-larizer that biases the optimal solution of (2) towards q(v).From a control-theoretic perspective, if q(v) represents a reference distribution, this term plays the role of a tracking error cost, penalizing deviations of p(v) from the reference. 

III. R EGULATING INTERACTIONS VIA FREE ENERGY 

MINIMIZATION 

A. The Control Framework 

Consider an agent interacting with an environment. The environment transitions from state xk−1 to state xk

when the control input uk is applied. The state space is denoted by X ⊆ Kn and the action space is denoted by U ⊆ Km. The possibly nonlinear and stochastic dynamics for the environment is pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk);we use the shorthand notation p(x) 

> k∣k−1

to denote 

pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk). We also let pk∣k−1 ∶= pk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1) = 

pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) πk (uk ∣ xk−1), where πk (uk ∣ xk−1) is a randomized policy. We use π(u) 

> k∣k−1

to denote this policy. Given a time-step k and the current state xk−1,

pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) characterizes the behavior of the environ-ment, while πk (uk ∣ xk−1) represents the distribution from which the control input is sampled. Together, these distribu-tions induce the closed-loop joint pdf pk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1).We frame interaction regulation as a free energy minimiza-tion problem. Specifically, human preferences are integrated online into an agent policy by tackling an optimal control problem, where the free energy is minimized in the proba-bility space. In the free energy, the loss encodes the agent (task-specific) cost, human preferences are encoded in the generative model. This yields the following: 

Problem III.1. At each k, given the current state xk−1 and: 

1) an environment model pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk);

2) a preference-encoding generative model qk∣k−1 ∶= 

qk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1) = q(x)

> k∣k−1

q(u)

> k∣k−1

, with q(x) 

> k∣k−1

∶= 

qk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) and q(u) 

> k∣k−1

∶= qk (uk ∣ xk−1);

3) F(⋅ , ⋅) defined as in (1) with l(xk, uk) = c(x) 

> k

(xk) + 

c(u) 

> k

(uk), where c(x) 

> k

(xk), c(u) 

> k

(uk) are the agent state/action costs. Find π(u),⋆ 

> k∣k−1

∶= π⋆ 

> k

(uk ∣ xk−1) such that 

π(u),⋆ 

> k∣k−1

∈ arg min π(u) 

> k∣k−1∈D

F ( pk∣k−1, q k∣k−1) . (3) An overview of the framework is shown in Fig.1. 

Remark III.1. In the cost of the problem in (3) , the loss function captures the task of the agent, which determines the agent policy if no human were present in the control loop. Instead, the KL divergence biases the optimal solution towards the generative model, and hence towards human preferences captured by the model. 

Remark III.2. The free energy minimization problem in (3) 

can be recast as a KL minimization problem, which naturally arises across learning and control, e.g., in the context of KL control, control as inference, and maximum diffusion/entropy reinforcement learning [4], [5], [28]. This reformulation also links the problem to variational inference [29, Chapter 10] and fully probabilistic design. Originating from the seminal work in [30], the core ideas of this latter approach imply that the cost in the formulation can capture a cost-to-go that can be obtained via a backward recursion; constraints can be added to the optimal control problem [31]. 

The optimal solution of Problem III.1, i.e., the free energy minimizing policy integrating human preferences (via the generative model) and the agent policy (via the agent cost) has an explicit expression that highlights the role of the agent cost and the generative model on optimal decisions. Standard Fig. 1: An agent computing actions according to the FEP (left). Closed-loop data are used to update the environment model. Given this model, and a generative model, the free energy minimizing policy is computed. FEP as a certainty-equivalent adaptive optimal control scheme (right). The environment model and the generative model are internal models, with the former being learned from closed-loop data, either online or offline. The generative model can combine multiple pdfs/pmfs, capturing biases. In our framework these biases are generated from human preferences. derivations are omitted for brevity, as they follow established arguments. By the chain rule for the KL divergence, see, e.g., [31], F ( pk∣k−1, q k∣k−1) in (3) can be written as 

DKL (π(u) 

> k∣k−1

∣∣ q(u)

> k∣k−1

) + Eπ(u)

> k∣k−1

[˜lk(Xk−1, Uk)] , (4) where ˜lk(⋅ , ⋅) is a combined loss given by 

DKL (p(x) 

> k∣k−1

∣∣ q(x)

> k∣k−1

) + Ep(x)

> k∣k−1

[c(x) 

> k

(Xk)] + c(u) 

> k

(uk) . (5) Hence, by means of Lemma II.1 we have that, at each k, the integrated policy solving Problem III.1 is 

π⋆ 

> k

(uk ∣ xk−1) = 1

Zk

qk (uk ∣ xk−1) exp (− ˜lk(xk−1, uk)) ,

(6) where the normalizer Zk is Eq(u)

> k∣k−1

[exp (− ˜lk(xk−1, uk))] .The expression in (5) is a free energy. In the context of the FEP, this functional is often minimized over past data w.r.t. 

pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) to learn the environment model, which is subsequently used to compute the optimal policy via (3); an exploration-promoting term can be included in the loss to facilitate learning. This results in a certainty-equivalent adaptive optimal control scheme in the probability space (Fig. 2, left). In applications (see, e.g., works surveyed in the introduction and references therein) the infinite-dimensional optimization is often tackled by resorting to policy/model parametrizations and/or Gaussian approximations. Remark-ably, while the environment model is learned, the generative model is typically assumed to be known. In our framework, as detailed in the next sections, the generative model is obtained from human preferences. 

B. Control Architecture 

The key functional components of the architecture, dis-tributed across the agent (a rover equipped with a camera) and human sides, and their interactions with the environment are schematically illustrated in Fig. 2 (left). The policy is computed on the agent-side. This free energy minimizing policy is computed according to (3) using the cost and environment model available to the agent, together with a generative model. The agent determines the action by sampling from the policy. The generative model used to compute the policy is obtained from the preferences provided by a remotely located person. The person receives the camera stream from the rover via a VR headset and can provide his/her preferences to the robot via gestures. These gestures are processed on the human-side of the architecture and the extracted preference uref is sent to the agent, where a preference/intention-encoding routine transforms the ges-tures into a generative model, qk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1). Next, we briefly discuss the blocks in the architecture (see https: //tinyurl.com/3v4yrf6d for code, details, settings). 

Sensors. The robot is equipped with onboard sensors that provide measurements of the environment. In particular, a front-facing camera is used to estimate the lateral deviation 

dk and heading error ϕk w.r.t. the lane center. 

Human-side. The remotely located human receives the robot’s onboard camera feed in real time through a VR headset. Hand gestures are captured and processed by an external computer using a feature-based gesture recognition algorithm. The recognized gesture is mapped to a preferential direction, which is transmitted to the robot. 

Intention encoding routine. Given the current lateral de-viation and heading error, the preferred direction is embed-ded into a joint probability of states and actions, i.e., the intention-encoding generative model, qk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1).

Environment model. The model available to the agent is the kinematic model of the rover. 

Cost. The cost captures the agent goal. In the experiments, we use a state cost that penalizes the increase in the lateral deviation and heading error. 

Optimal policy. The control policy is computed by imple-menting the expression in Eq. (3), using the cost, environ-ment and generative models described above. 

Sampling. At each time-step, the control input is sampled from the optimal policy and applied to the robot. In the current implementation, we pick the action with the highest probability. Alternative sampling strategies can be consid-ered; an example is discussed in the following remark. 

Remark III.3. At each k, given state xk−1, one can sample from (6) by simulating the Langevin dynamics [32] 

duk = −∇ uk Φk(xk−1, uk) dt + √2 dw(t),

where w(t) is a standard Wiener process and Φk(⋅ , ⋅) is 

Φk(xk−1, uk) = ˜lk(xk−1, uk) − log qk (uk ∣ xk−1) .Fig. 2: Proposed architecture. Overview (left): the robot’s onboard camera stream is sent to a remotely located person. The person can generate high-level gestures. Gestures, once interpreted via a gesture recognition software, are mapped, on the agent-side, onto a generative model. On the agent-side, this model together with a model of the environment available to the agent and a cost that captures its goal, is used to build the integrated policy in (6). A sampling routine is used to sample an action from the policy. Experimental setup (right): the robot is a Duckiebot and navigates on a circular map. The person is equipped with a MetaQuest VR headset and gestures are parsed via OpenCV running on a standard laptop. 

While interesting per se , this approach may also enable sampling via thermodynamic hardware [32]. 

IV. A RCHITECTURE IMPLEMENTATION 

A. Set-Up 

The rover (Fig. 2, right) is a Duckiebot ( https:// tinyurl.com/4n4p8x4v ) and navigates on a smooth rectangular road layout of 1.83 m × 2.42 m. Each straight segment consists of a two-lane road (lane width 0.21 m). The Duckiebot is a differential-drive robot equipped with a front-facing camera, an Inertial Measurement Unit, a time-of-flight sensor, and encoders. Computations are performed onboard using an embedded computing unit (NVIDIA Jetson Nano), enabling autonomous operation without external processing. The experimental setup also includes an external computer and a Meta Quest 3 headset ( https://tinyurl.com/ 5h4u2dy8 ). The computer processes human gestures to generate a reference signal. As described below, this signal is processed on the robot to obtain a generative model. The headset allows the person to receive the robot’s camera stream in real time. 

B. Control Pipeline 

We refer to our repository for detailed settings and pa-rameter values. Let vk be the rover linear velocity and 

ωk the angular velocity. In the current implementation, the control input uk = [ vk, ω k] is discretized. The action space 

U is [0, v max ] × [− ωmax , ω max ], where vmax , ωmax are the maximum linear and angular admissible velocity values, respectively. Discretization is over a uniform grid of size 

Mv × Mω , resulting in M feasible control inputs. Human gestures are mapped to a finite set of discrete preferred actions ( Left , Right , Forward , Stop ) and transmitted to the robot. On the robot, these preferences are mapped to a desired input, uref , compatible with the robot kinematics. Specifically, Left , Right , Forward and Stop are mapped onto 

[0, ω ref ], [0, −ωref ], [vref , 0] and [0, 0], respectively. Unlike the other gestures, when the Stop command is detected, the integrated policy is bypassed and the rover’s velocity is set to zero. The vector uref is updated asynchronously and held constant between sampling instants. Given this vector, qk (uk ∣ xk−1) is computed as a truncated Gaussian centered in uref . That is, qk (uk ∣ xk−1) = N ( uref , Σ2

> u

),where Σu = diag (σv , σ ω ). Also, qk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) is a Gaussian over the state xk = [ dk, ϕ k], where dk is the lateral deviation from the lane center and ϕk is the heading error. Namely, qk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) = N ( μq , σ 2I2), where μq

is obtained from an offline-learned regression model trained on synthetic data generated from a simplified unicycle model. The generative model on the robot is then obtained as 

qk (xk, uk ∣ xk−1) = qk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) qk (uk ∣ xk−1).

Remark IV.1. In the current implementation, the covariance matrices in the generative model are tunable parameters. As noted in, e.g., [31], higher variances may be associated to lower trust in the model. We reserve the problem of learning these parameters for future research. 

The model pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) is given by the Gaussian 

pk (xk ∣ xk−1, uk) = N ( μp, σ 2I2), where μp is obtained from the standard kinematic unicycle model, and σ2I2 cap-tures the presence of sensors/actuators noise. The agent goal, i.e., zero lateral deviation and zero heading error, is encoded in the state cost c(x) 

> k

(xk), which consists of two terms so that c(x) 

> k

(xk) = c(x) 

> err

(xk) + c(x)

> barrier

(xk). The first term is a cost that penalizes the lateral deviation from the lane center and the heading misalignment, i.e., 

c(x) 

> err

(xk) = γd ¯d2 

> k

+ γϕ ¯ϕ2 

> k

+ γc ¯dk ¯ϕk, (7) where ¯dk = dk 

> dscale

, and ¯ϕk = ϕk 

> ϕscale

, with dscale and ϕscale 

being normalization parameters used to balance the contri-bution of the lateral deviation and heading error in the cost. The second cost term, a barrier to the lateral deviation, is 

c(x)

> barrier

(xk) = γbarrier ( 1

β log (1 + exp (β(∣ ¯dk∣ − dth )))) 

> 2

,

where dth is a threshold in the normalized lateral deviation determining the activation of the barrier penalty. The action cost c(u) 

> k

(uk) is set to zero in the experiments. Given these elements, the policy is computed according to (3) using the fact that DKL (p(x) 

> k∣k−1

∥ q(x)

> k∣k−1

) = 12σ2 ∥μp − μq ∥2. In the experiments presented next, sampling is performed by picking the action with the highest probability. V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

Straight lane navigation. The rover navigates along astraight lane section, aiming to keep both lateral deviation and heading error at 0. However, it receives time-varying human preferences that may conflict with this goal. The experiment shows that the free-energy-minimizing integrated policy does not blindly execute these preferences, but selec-tively attenuates those that would lead the rover out of the lane while preserving the lane-following objective. Fig. 3 reports the time evolution of lateral deviation (top) and heading error (bottom). The experiments show that changes in the preferences induce transient variations in the heading errors. These are visible as peaks in ϕ and correspond to corrective steering actions performed by the robot to keep both d and ϕ to 0. Despite these transients, the lateral deviation remains bounded within a relatively small range throughout the experiment. In particular, throughout the experiment, d has mean −0.0538 m and standard devi-ation 0.0407 m, while ϕ has mean 0.0038 rad and standard deviation 0.4160 rad. This indicates that the robot maintains a limited average displacement from the lane center and does not accumulate systematic orientation bias over time. The larger variability observed in ϕ, compared to d, suggests that the robot, due to the cost, primarily acts through heading corrections to compensate for conflicting commands. That is, orientation is actively adjusted to prevent lateral error accumulation. Even when the human input is inconsistent with the task, the robot does not drift outside the lane. 

Full-lap. We evaluate the integrated policy under consistent and conflicting human preferences during a full-lap lane-following task. The results show that the policy mediates between human input and the rover objective captured by its cost: task-consistent preferences are followed, while con-flicting ones are down-weighted. Fig. 4 reports three representative snapshots illustrating different interaction scenarios between the human input and the rover from a video available at https://tinyurl. com/ae52ereu . The resulting behavior was obtained using a larger variance for qk (uk ∣ xk−1), modeling a lower trust in human preferences (see Remark IV.1). In this setting, at t = 1 s (left), the robot is on a straight segment and the operator provides a Forward preference. In this case, the human preference is consistent with the task, and the resulting policy assigns high probability to actions aligned with the reference. As a consequence, the robot follows the command and maintains its position within the lane. At 

t = 10 s (middle), the robot is still on a straight segment, but the operator provides a Right command. Although the command is admissible, it is not consistent with the lane-following objective. The policy assigns lower probability to such actions due to their higher predicted cost, and the robot 

Fig. 3: Background colors denote preferences received by the rover while it is navigating straight (colors online). Evolution of lateral deviation (top) and heading error (bottom). Despite conflicts between the agent task and human intentions, the robot maintains bounded deviation from the lane center. continues to move straight, effectively rejecting the human input. Finally, at t = 50 s (right), the robot approaches a curved segment while the operator provides a Forward com-mand which is incompatible with the task, as maintaining a straight motion would lead the robot outside the lane. The policy compensates for this mismatch by selecting a turning action, allowing the robot to follow the curvature of the road. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced a control-theoretical framework to regulate interactions between human and autonomous agents. The framework incorporates, online, human preferences into an autonomous agent policy. We turned the framework into an open control architecture and experimentally evaluated its effectiveness. In the experiments, a rover navigating using onboard sensory information interacted with a remotely located person. Sensory information was shared with the person via VR headsets and preferences, inducing both cooperative and competitive interactions, could be provided to the rover via gestures. Experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach. The results presented here open a number of research questions. First, the architecture does not feature an online learning component and our future work aims to integrate policy computation under free energy minimization with online learning. This motivates analytical studies to assess closed-loop guarantees of the resulting dual control scheme. Second, we seek to develop the control architecture into a general-purpose framework capable of accommodating het-erogeneous multi-agent settings, safety with control barrier functions, and diverse sensory information. Finally, exploit-ing the link with the Langevin equation (Remark III.3), we plan to deploy our method on thermodynamic hardware. Fig. 4: Full-lap experiment. Three representative snapshots are shown. At t = 1 s (left), the operator provides a task-consistent Forward command on a straight segment, which the robot follows. At t = 10 s (middle), the operator provides a Right command inconsistent with lane following, and the robot maintains a straight trajectory. At t = 50 s (right), the operator provides a Forward command on a curved segment, and the robot turns to remain within the lane. 

Acknowledgments. The authors thank Prof. M. di Bernardo (Univ. of Naples Federico II and Scuola Superiore Merid-ionale) for his support and Dr. H. Jesawada (NYU Abu Dhabi) for initializing the set-up while at the Univ. of Salerno. Experiments were conducted at the CoRE Lab of the Scuola Superiore Meridionale. REFERENCES [1] N. Lambert, “Reinforcement learning from human feedback,” 2025 (https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12501 ). [2] K. Friston, “The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?,” 

Trends in cognitive sciences , vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 293–301, 2009. [3] B. Eysenbach and S. Levine, “Maximum entropy RL (provably) solves some robust RL problems,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [4] T. A. Berrueta, A. Pinosky, and T. D. Murphey, “Maximum diffu-sion reinforcement learning,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 6, p. 504–514, May 2024. [5] E. Todorov, “Efficient computation of optimal actions,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 106, no. 28, pp. 11478–11483, 2009. [6] A. Srivastava and S. M. Salapaka, “Dynamic parameters in sequential decision making,” Automatica , vol. 148, p. 110795, Feb. 2023. [7] T. van de Laar, A. Ozcelikkale, and H. Wymeersch, “Application of the free energy principle to estimation and control,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 69, p. 4234–4244, 2021. [8] E. Garrabe, H. Jesawada, C. D. Vecchio, and G. Russo, “On convex data-driven inverse optimal control for nonlinear, non-stationary and stochastic systems,” Automatica , vol. 173, p. 112015, Mar. 2025. [9] Y. Chen, T. T. Georgiou, and M. Pavon, “On the relation between optimal transport and Schr¨ odinger bridges: A stochastic control view-point,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications , vol. 169, p. 671–691, Sept. 2015. [10] I. Haasler, A. Ringh, Y. Chen, and J. Karlsson, “Multimarginal optimal transport with a tree-structured cost and the Schr¨ odinger bridge problem,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization , vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2428–2453, 2021. [11] T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K. J. Friston, Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior . The MIT Press, Mar. 2022. [12] A. Shafiei, H. Jesawada, K. Friston, and G. Russo, “Distributionally robust free energy principle for decision-making,” Nature Communi-cations , vol. 17, Dec. 2026. [13] T. J. Prescott and S. P. Wilson, “Understanding brain functional architecture through robotics,” Science Robotics , vol. 8, no. 78, p. eadg6014, 2023. [14] F. Rossi, V. Centorrino, F. Bullo, and G. Russo, “An energy-based mechanism for compositional behavior,” 2025 ( https://arxiv. org/abs/2512.04745 ). [15] P. Lanillos, C. Meo, C. Pezzato, A. A. Meera, M. Baioumy, W. Ohata, A. Tschantz, B. Millidge, M. Wisse, C. L. Buckley, and J. Tani, “Active inference in robotics and artificial agents: Survey and challenges,” 2021 ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01871 ). [16] G. Oliver, P. Lanillos, and G. Cheng, “An empirical study of active inference on a humanoid robot,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems , vol. 14, p. 462–471, June 2022. [17] M. Inoue and V. Gupta, “”Weak” control for human-in-the-loop systems,” IEEE Control Systems Letters , vol. 3, p. 440–445, Apr. 2019. [18] S. Musi´ c and S. Hirche, “Control sharing in human-robot team interaction,” Annual Reviews in Control , vol. 44, p. 342–354, 2017. [19] S. Sweeney, H. Lhachemi, A. Mannion, G. Russo, and R. Shorten, “Pitchfork-bifurcation-based competitive and collaborative control of an e-bike system,” Automatica , vol. 146, p. 110595, Dec. 2022. [20] J. K¨ ohler, “Certainty-equivalent adaptive MPC for uncertain nonlinear systems,” 2026 ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17843 ). [21] T. Bas ¸ar, S. Bose, P. Brown, C.-Y. Chiu, B. L. Ferguson, C. Mahesh-wari, K. Savla, R. K. Velicheti, and M. Wu, “Control via incentives and information in socio-technical systems: A tutorial,” in 2026 American Control Conference (ACC) , pp. 3357–3372, 2026. [22] T. Soleymani, J. S. Baras, S. Hirche, and K. H. Johansson, “Foun-dations of value of information: A semantic metric for networked control systems tasks,” 2024 ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2403. 11927 ). [23] S. Kullback and R. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics , vol. 22, pp. 79–87, 1951. [24] S. T. Jose and O. Simeone, “Free energy minimization: A unified framework for modeling, inference, learning, and optimization [lecture notes],” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 120– 125, 2021. [25] P. Guan, M. Raginsky, and R. M. Willett, “Online Markov Decision Processes with Kullback–Leibler control cost,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1423–1438, 2014. [26] T. Cammardella, A. Buˇ si´ c, and S. P. Meyn, “Kullback–Leibler-Quadratic optimal control,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimiza-tion , vol. 61, p. 3234–3258, Oct. 2023. [27] E. Garrab´ e and G. Russo, “Probabilistic design of optimal sequential decision-making algorithms in learning and control,” Annual Reviews in Control , vol. 54, pp. 81–102, 2022. [28] H. J. Kappen, V. G´ omez, and M. Opper, “Optimal control as a graphical model inference problem,” Machine Learning , vol. 87, p. 159–182, Feb. 2012. [29] K. P. Murphy, Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced Topics . MIT Press, 2023. [30] M. K´ arn´ y, “Towards fully probabilistic control design,” Automatica ,vol. 32, p. 1719–1722, Dec. 1996. [31] D. Gagliardi and G. Russo, “On a probabilistic approach to synthe-size control policies from example datasets,” Automatica , vol. 137, p. 110121, Mar. 2022. [32] D. Melanson, M. Abu Khater, M. Aifer, K. Donatella, M. Hunter Gor-don, T. Ahle, G. Crooks, A. J. Martinez, F. Sbahi, and P. J. Coles, “Thermodynamic computing system for AI applications,” Nature Com-munications , vol. 16, no. 1, p. 3757, 2025.