Title: Embodied Scene Understanding for Vision Language Models via MetaVQA

URL Source: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2025/papers/Wang_Embodied_Scene_Understanding_for_Vision_Language_Models_via_MetaVQA_CVPR_2025_paper.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 02 Jun 2025 12:14:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Embodied Scene Understanding for Vision Language Models via MetaVQA 

## Weizhen Wang, Chenda Duan, Zhenghao Peng, Yuxin Liu, Bolei Zhou University of California, Los Angeles 

## Abstract 

Vision Language Models (VLMs) demonstrate significant potential as embodied AI agents for various mobility ap-plications. However, a standardized, closed-loop bench-mark for evaluating their spatial reasoning and sequen-tial decision-making capabilities is lacking. To address this, we present MetaVQA: a comprehensive benchmark designed to assess and enhance VLMs’ understanding of spatial relationships and scene dynamics through Vi-sual Question Answering (VQA) and closed-loop simu-lations. MetaVQA leverages Set-of-Mark prompting and top-down view ground-truth annotations from nuScenes and Waymo datasets to automatically generate extensive question-answer pairs based on diverse real-world traffic scenarios, ensuring object-centric and context-rich instruc-tions. Our experiments show that fine-tuning VLMs with the MetaVQA Dataset significantly improves their embod-ied scene understanding, which is evident not only in im-proved VQA accuracy but also in emerging safety-aware driving maneuvers. In addition, the learning exhibits strong transferability from simulation to real-world observation. The project webpage is at https://metadriverse. github.io/metavqa .

## 1. Introduction 

Recent advances demonstrate the potential of using Vision Language Models (VLMs) as Embodied AI agents in ap-plications like robot arms control [1, 2] and autonomous driving [3]. These tasks share the common components of following instructions, understanding the surroundings, and taking the optimal action to achieve the goals. For safety and generalizability in the real world, these AI agents should have the capability of embodied scene understand-ing, in terms of spatial awareness and embodied under-standing: Spatial awareness refers to the ability to internal-ize spatial relationships among objects when observing the 3D world through the 2D image captured by a monocular camera. Embodied understanding is the ability to relate ob-served objects egocentrically, foresee the implication of ac-tion, and choose the optimal action to achieve the instructed goal safely. Benefiting from large-scale pre-training, off-the-shelf VLMs obtain embodied scene understanding to some de-gree. However, their spatial awareness is limited as most VLMs are pre-trained on offline text and images. Mean-while, their embodied understanding is also constrained be-cause instruction to interact with the environment occupies a very small portion of their training data. In the autonomous driving task, many prior works [3– 9] address the training data discrepancy by creating tai-lored Visual-Question-Answering (VQA) datasets for fine-tuning, and they all report improvements on their bench-marks. However, these benchmarks are not commensurable or suitable for zero-shot evaluation on general-purpose VLMs. This is because they follow different textual and vi-sual expressions to describe the scene and refer to objects. For example, DriveLM [4] refers to objects by tuples com-posed of the object identifier, the ID of the corresponding camera, and the pixel positions of the 2D bounding box’s vertices in the camera’s coordinate. In contrast, in ELM [5], objects are grounded by a triple composed of the charac-ter “c” and the pixel coordinates of the center of the 2D bounding box. Adding to their disagreements are their dis-tinctions from intuitive conventions for humans: A person would ground an object by its features (color, shape, etc. )expressed in natural language. This mismatch can weaken the diagnosing power of the VQA datasets: a bad perfor-mance of a VLM could be caused by miscommunication rather than its lack of scene understanding capability. Moreover, existing works evaluate embodied scene un-derstanding of VLMs primarily on the open-loop VQA task. Nevertheless, embodied agents, as the name suggests, should be evaluated in interactive environments with robotic embodiment to achieve certain goals. DriveVLM [3] surro-gates closed-loop evaluation with short-term scene descrip-tions and planning using observations captured from vehi-cles driven by humans. However, manual effort is costly, and there is no VLM-environment interaction. Vista [10] uses a trained world model for simulation, but the obser-vations generated by the model degrade promptly as the simulation proceeds. Lastly, safety-critical scenarios are absent in existing works since they utilize only real-world This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation. Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version; the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore. 22453 Figure 1. Constructing MetaVQA benchmark . We extract scene graphs from real-world traffic scenarios collected from nuScenes and Waymo datasets(WOMD) and then feed them into question-type-dependent queries to generate ground-truth answers. The real and simulated RGB observations are processed with Set-of-Mark prompting. We evaluate the VLMs on both open-loop VQA tasks and closed-loop navigation tasks in simulation. 

data (and therefore, the collection of dangerous situations is costly and unlikely). However, we need to stress-test VLMs to verify their safe autonomy, and it is insufficient to limit VLM evaluations in typical situations. To address these issues, we present MetaVQA, a bench-mark designed for zero-shot evaluation of general-purpose VLMs and for improving their embodied scene understand-ing through fine-tuning. For generalizable learning and as-sessment, MetaVQA contains a massive VQA corpus in common wordings, and its observations–including both real and simulated images from diverse scenarios–are annotated with the Set-of-Mark prompting [11] for clear reference and visual grounding. Furthermore, MetaVQA utilizes the MetaDrive [12] simulator for scalable closed-loop evalua-tion of the VLMs as embodied agents in real-world traffic scenarios collected from nuScenes [13] and Waymo Open Motion Dataset [14], with additional stress-testing in safety-critical scenarios. We benchmark on representative VLMs [15–20], and we observe significant improvement in em-bodied scene understanding after fine-tuning, shown by the VQA accuracy and the performance of the closed-loop driv-ing task. Additional experiments also verify that learning on simulated data can substantially improve the embodied understanding in the held-out real-world data . More specif-ically, the VLM model fine-tuned on our synthetic VQA data becomes better in nuScene real-world VQA task. We summarize our contributions as follows: 1. We propose the MetaVQA benchmark to evaluate the embodied scene understanding of VLMs in a plug-and-go way. VLMs can be improved significantly after being fine-tuned on our data. 2. We show that the embodied scene understanding capa-bility of the VLMs is generalizable and transferable from simulated to real-world data, where the VLM trained only on simulated data shows remarkable zero-shot QA performance on real-world data. 3. We conduct the closed-loop evaluation of VLMs as embodied agents in safety-critical driving scenarios. Fine-tuned VLMs exhibit superior sequential decision-making when charged with unseen driving scenarios. 

## 2. Related Work 

Driving scene understanding datasets. Datasets have been proposed for driving scene understanding [21–24]. For explaining driving behaviors, some works [4, 7–9, 25–34] provide annotations for scene descriptions, traffic elements, and high-level instructions. For example, BDD-X [32] and Talk2Car [7] supply succinct descriptions of driving scenar-ios and directions; Rank2Tell [33] and nuScenes-QA [34] focus on ranking object importance and annotating road el-ement attributes, respectively; DriveLM-nuScenes/CARLA [4] utilizes a graph-based visual-question-answering for driving descriptions. Concurrent with this work, DriveM-LLM [9] inspects spatial understanding in absolute (de-tailed to meters) and relative descriptions (for example, left or right). Additionally, AutoTrust [8], another concurrent work, focuses on the trustworthiness and safety-awareness of VLMs in driving. However, these datasets often rely on limited traffic data (primarily the nuScenes [13] dataset) and lack diversity in data/question types, limiting their po-tential for broader, generalizable applications. We address these limitations by data upscaling and question diversifica-tion for improved learning. 

Vision language models as driving agents. Recent at-tempts leverage language models to enhance traditional au-tonomous driving tasks [35–37]. DriveGPT4 [6] delivers an interpretable system, while Lingo-1 [38] integrates vision, language, and action for model training and interpretations. GPT-Driver [39] leverages large language models for tra-jectory prediction, and ELM [5] and DriveVLM [40] ex-pand capabilities in long-horizon space and handling corner cases. However, these models are often evaluated offline, lacking a closed-loop evaluation framework that captures the interactive nature of driving. Therefore, we amend this 22454 absence by deploying VLMs into the simulation. 

Closed-loop evaluation of end-to-end driving agents. 

Driving simulators facilitate closed-loop testing before real-world trials. Notable examples include LimSim++ [41], MetaDrive [12], CARLA [42], and nuPlan [43] which use rule-based engines in evaluating driving behavior. However, their evaluation metrics typically focus on numerical values such as success rate and route completion rate, which lack interpretability. As a fix, we incorporate scene understand-ing and the reasonableness of behaviors into the evaluation by incorporating online VQA tasks during simulation. 

## 3. Constructing MetaVQA Benchmark 

3.1. Our Design Principles 

To benchmark and improve general-purpose VLMs on em-bodied scene understanding, we consider the following two key questions when designing our VQA dataset: 

How to effectively communicate with general-purpose VLMs? An analogy can be drawn between the VLMs performing the VQA task and the students taking the tests. The problem set should have unambiguous and understand-able instructions for fair evaluation. When evaluating em-bodied scene understanding, existing works have a variety of heterogeneous prompting conventions and expected an-swer forms. For example, DriveLM [4], ELM [5], and DriveVLM [3] refer to objects by pixel positions of 2D bounding box’s vertices in the camera’s coordinate. These works expect the models to associate pixel coordinates with regions on the images. However, such association conven-tion is rare in the pre-training data corpus collected from the Web. In addition, ELM prompts models to convey spa-tial and dynamics (ego speed, heading, etc. ) information in continuous values (world coordinates, top-down yaw an-gle, meters per second, etc. ), contrasting to DriveLM, which discretizes this information. Nevertheless, both conven-tions are unfamiliar to general-purpose VLMs pre-trained on human-created data. Therefore, if these VLMs are zero-shot evaluated on these tasks and protocols, it will be diffi-cult to attribute the cause of deficient performance. In con-trast, CLEVR [44] uses template-generated English refer-rals. However, natural language referral can be ambiguous when the scene becomes complicated in layout and appear-ance, hindering fair evaluation. 

How to thoroughly evaluate embodied scene under-standing? As mentioned in the introduction section, we interpret the embodied scene understanding capabilities from two aspects: understanding spatial relationships and understanding an action’s consequence. Existing works [3– 5, 8, 9, 40] evaluate this capability on the VQA tasks by cre-ating a sufficiently encompassing question suite. However, the metrics for evaluations are incommensurable. ELM in-troduced “Pr@k” metrics to evaluate the performance on localization tasks, while DriveLM uses classification error as the metrics since they discretize space. An extreme case can be found in DriveMLLM [9], in which distinct accuracy metrics are defined for each type of question. In addition, in the driving field, closed-loop egocentric evaluation through interactive simulation is rarely explored, leaving the claim of learned embodied scene understanding untested in situa-tions of actual embodiments. Addressing the above issues, we first leverage the Set-of-Mark (SoM) prompting [11], which elevates the visual grounding capabilities of VLMs and provides an intuitive and unambiguous referral scheme. The suitability of using SoM prompting is further discussed in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3. Then, we formulate each question in the multiple-choice setting to make direct and fair evaluations. To support zero-shot evaluations of general-purpose VLMs, spatial and dy-namics information is categorized into common phrases (for example, “front”) with fine-grained numerical descriptions added as additional explanations. Sec. 4.2 showcases the intuitiveness and descriptiveness of this setup through hu-man study, and the zero-shot performances in the bench-mark from Sec. 5.1 empirically validate the suitability. For thorough examinations of VLMs as embodied agents, we construct 30 question types covering all aspects of spatial reasoning and embodied understanding of VLMs with di-verse scenarios using both real-world and simulated obser-vations, and we further evaluate VLMs with closed-loop driving simulation. 

3.2. VQA Generation Pipeline 

To generate questions from diverse driving scenarios at scale, we employ a search-based method to programmati-cally extract answers for template-generated questions from scene graphs and quality-check the dataset with human as discussed in Sec. 4.2. Fig. 1 illustrates the overall VQA generation pipeline of the MetaVQA. There are three essen-tial stages: scenario aggregation, Set-of-Mark annotations, and QA generation. We describe each stage as follows. 

3.2.1. Scenario Aggregation from Multiple Sources. 

MetaVQA utilizes real-world traffic from Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [45] and nuScenes dataset [13] to evaluate the safeness and robustness of the VLMs un-der diverse situations. The WOMD dataset is much larger than the nuScenes dataset, which contains only around 800 scenarios. However, the WOMD dataset lacks RGB obser-vations for VQA data curation. For this reason, we use MetaDrive[12] to reconstruct WOMD traffic scenarios for scalable and efficient simulation. We also create the digital twins of the nuScene dataset in simulation to augment the appearance diversity of collected scenarios. 

Scene collection of nuScenes dataset. The nuScenes dataset provides a devkit to visualize driving scenarios, and 22455 Figure 2. Set-of-Mark annotation process . For real images from the nuScenes (upper row) dataset, we cast 3D bounding boxes into 2D space. For simulated images (lower row) rendered in MetaDrive, we extract 2D bounding boxes from the simulator’s instance segmentation. 

we use it to extract 3D scene graphs from each annotated keyframe. Each node in the graph contains spatial and pose information of objects, and labeled edges–representing spa-tial relationships–are connected algorithmically. Objects are also filtered by relevancy and visibility before being loaded in as object nodes in the scene graph, and implemen-tation details can be found in the supplementary materials. 

Scene reconstruction with simulator. We also utilize ScenarioNet [46] data platform to reconstruct the WOMD scenarios. ScenarioNet converts the WOMD traffic into unified records importable by MetaDrive, and the simula-tor loads these scenarios and renders top-down layouts into egocentric RGB images. Following the nuScenes conven-tion, keyframes are sampled at 2Hz frequency, and we fol-low the sensor setup in the nuScenes dataset to preserve ob-servation consistency. We additionally use nuScenes sce-narios to create digital twins of the original image, making the evaluation of embodied scene understanding less sensi-tive to variation in lighting and object appearances. 

3.2.2. Set-of-Mark Prompting 

MetaVQA aims to provide a generalizable evaluation of embodied scene understanding for general-purpose VLMs, and Set-of-Mark [11] (SoM) prompting provides a clear av-enue for humans to issue instructions and VLMs to ground objects of interest visually. We focus on the ability of VLMs as embodied agents. Consequently, we consider the per-ception task a mostly solved problem, and directly high-lighting relevant traffic objects is not an overdue hint. This presumption is supported since various detection methods have been established and widely applied [47–49]. As il-lustrated in Fig. 2, objects of interest are enclosed by 2D bounding boxes. We extract maximal 2D bounding based on 3D bounding box’s projections for the nuScenes images, and we use a shader-based instance segmentation camera to create annotated simulated images. Implementation details and further discussions on the impact of marking style can be found in the supplementary materials.    

> Figure 3. Question-answer generation pipeline , illustrated by generating an identify distance question. Note that an ad-ditional “explanation” field is also generated to improve VLM training, and it is not used for evaluation.

3.2.3. Question-Answer Generation 

We format each question in the multiple-choice setting. Since we want a generalizable evaluation without domain-specific fine-tuning of VLMs, this simple setup is straight-forward and complete to cover answer space since we cat-egorize continuous spatial information into discrete options (and thus can be fully covered as multiple-choice options). As illustrated in Fig. 3, during the question-answer gener-ation process, a random object node in the scene graph is selected to be examined, and the ground truth answer–along with other multiple-choice candidates–is generated based on the scene graph using question-type-bounded queries. To prevent VLM collapses during fine-tuning, we incorporate an “explanation” field in the generated VQAs for caption-ing. During training, this field will be part of the ground-truth answers VLMs are tasked to generate to deepen their scene understanding. The implementation details can be found in the supplementary materials. 

## 4. MetaVQA Dataset 

We present the MetaVQA Dataset. Besides providing statis-tics, we showcase its quality and usefulness for evaluating and learning embodied scene understanding. We validate that (1) Set-of-Mark annotated questions are suitable for zero-shot evaluation of general-purpose VLMs. (2) The em-bodied scene understanding capability that emerges from the finetuning is generalizable and transferable from the simulated world to the real world, supporting the utility of simulator-conditioned synthetic data. (3) The learning is scalable for MetaVQA Dataset, warranting its massive size. 

4.1. Dataset Composition 

MetaVQA Dataset consists of 4,305,450 multiple-choice questions generated from 442,102 annotated frames ex-tracted from 400 nuScenes scenarios and 6,900 Waymo scenarios covering 59,682 seconds (16.5 hours) of driving log. The questions can be categorized into three supercat-egories: spatial questions, embodied questions, and 

grounding questions. The former two supercategories cover the two facets of embodied scene understanding: spa-22456 How close are object <3> and object <2> positioned? Classify the answer into: (A) Very close (0-2m) (B) Close (2-10m) (C) Medium (10-30m) (D) Far(30m-).     

> Explanation:
> Object <3>, a truck to the left and in front of us, is to the left and behind object <2>, a car to the right and in front of us, at a medium distance.
> Answer: C
> Suppose our current speed is very fast (50+ mph), and we perform action "KEEP_STRAIGHT" for 2.0 seconds. Will we run into object<1>, provided that it remains still? Select the best option from: (A) Yes (B) No.
> Explanation:
> We will run into object <1> currently in front sector after 0.1 seconds.
> Answer: A
> What is the numerical label associated with the highlighted area? Choose the best answer from option (A) through (D): (A) 19 (B) 7 (C) 1 (D) 32
> Answer: CSpatial: relative_distance Embodied: embodied_collision Grounding Embodied Subtype Supertype Spatial Subtype

Figure 4. Left: Distribution of the question types. Right : Example for each question supertype. 

tial awareness and embodied understanding, and the lat-ter one diagnoses VLMs’ capabilities to associate marked objects in the observation with textual referral. The de-tailed formulation for each subcategory is discussed in the supplementary materials, and we lay out the compositions and exemplary VQA pairs in Fig. 4. Noticeably, we de-sign a special training-only describe scenario ques-tion that asks models to describe all labeled objects in the observation to accentuate embodied scene understanding. For expedited experimentation, we curate a representative training set of 150,000 questions, with 50,000 coming from Waymo scenarios, 50,000 coming from nuScenes scenarios, and 50,000 coming from the simulated nuScenes scenarios in the simulator. In addition, we curate a withheld test set of 9,725 questions with 2,524 annotated frames from 212 traffic scenarios. Approximately half of the questions use observations reconstructed from simulation, and the other half use real-world images. 

4.2. Answerability of Set-of-Mark Prompting 

Human evaluation. We distribute a questionnaire com-prising 35 sampled questions to six human participants for answerability examination: a good human performance suggests the intuitiveness of the wordings in the question bodies and the clarity in permitted answers. Upon report-ing, novice participants achieve an average of 88% accu-racy despite acknowledging question difficulty, showcasing the answerability and directness of the MetaVQA Dataset. Details are included in the supplementary materials. 

Set-of-Mark prompting. Previous work verifies that us-ing Set-of-Mark prompting on real pictures improves the visual grounding abilities of VLMs [11]. To further vali-date that VLMs can associate referred labels in text with marked regions in both simulated and real images, we in-troduce grounding questions. Objects are labeled ran-domly for each such question, and one of the labels is en-closed with a white box. As illustrated in Fig. 4, VLMs are prompted to identify the singular correct label located                           

> Model Overall Sim-Grounding Real-Grounding
> LLaVA -NeXT [15] 0.248 0.271 0.229
> LLaVA -OneVision [16] 0.728 0.615 0.827
> GPT -4o [18] 0.831 0.766 0.888 Qwen2 [17] 0.874 0.890 0.859
> Llama3.2 [19] 0.790 0.716 0.855
> InternVL2 -8B [50] 0.702 0.610 0.783 Average 0.696 0.644 0.740

Table 1. Zero-shot grounding accuracy . Most VLMs success-fully associate label referrals with marked regions, supporting the use of Set-of-Mark prompting. 

inside the box. We benchmark the zero-shot grounding per-formance on multiple VLMs on the withheld test set from Sec. 4.1, as shown in Tab. 1, VLMs achieve, on average, 69.6% zero-shot accuracies on the 467 grounding questions, with the best-performing VLM achieving 87.4% accura-cies. Noticeably, LLaVA-NeXT (llava-1.6-vicuna-7b) [15] underperforms significantly, and this abnormality is caused by the VLM failing to generate tokens in the expected con-vention, which will be discussed in Sec. 5.1. This finding suggests that most VLMs can accurately associate labels re-ferred in text with objects. Therefore, using labels for object referral in the question body is an unambiguous and effec-tive wording convention, and we can be confident in asso-ciating bad testing performance on the MetaVQA Dataset with a deficiency in embodied scene understanding. 

4.3. Transfer learning with simulated observations 

The MetaDrive simulator [12], while capable of import-ing real-world traffic, renders distinctive observations com-pared to real-world photos, and this visual gap could lead to issues in learning. We perform a transfer learning exper-iment with four trials to address this concern. In the first trial, we benchmark InternVL2-8B [50]’s zero-shot perfor-mance on the test set from Sec. 4.1. In the following three trials, the VLM is fine-tuned on (1) 50,000 questions with only simulated observations, (2) 50,000 questions with only real observations, and (3) 150,000 questions with both. The third training set comprises the second set and a superset 22457 Training Set Overall Sim Real Zeroshot 0.592 0.552 0.632 Sim only 0.807 0.795 0.819 Real only 0.825 0.792 0.858 Sim+Real 0.869 0.853 0.884 

Table 2. Sim-to-Real trans-ferability . InternVL2-8B achieves the best test accuracy when trained using both simulated and real images.             

> Training Size Overall Sim Real 9,375 0.794 0.764 0.824 37,500 0.845 0.825 0.865 150,000 0.869 0.853 0.884

Table 3. Data scalability . We observe a positive correlation between InternVL2-8B’s test performance and training data size. 

of the first training set. Referring to Tab. 2, learning us-ing both simulated and real observations leads to the best test accuracy. Surprisingly, training in either visual domain can significantly boost the VLM’s performance in the other domain. This finding warrants the addition of simulated ob-servation to the real-world training data. 

4.4. Data Scalability of Learning 

We conduct this experiment to demonstrate the scalable learning of the MetaVQA Dataset. Using the training set specified in Sec. 4.1, we gradually down-sample to generate training sets of 150,000, 37,500, and 9,375 questions corre-spondingly, on which InternVL2-8B is fine-tuned. Tab. 3 presents the accuracy on the test set from Sec. 5.1, and we observe a positive correlation between the scale of training and the test performance. This positive scaling warrants the encompassing size of the MetaVQA dataset. 

## 5. Benchmark Results 

5.1. Visual Question Answering 

Task formulation & Metrics. VLMs will select the best options from multiple-choice questions based on images an-notated with Set-of-Marks prompting. As shown in Fig. 4, the model is instructed to answer in single capitalized let-ters. We evaluate the model based on its failure rate (of outputting valid responses) and the accuracy of the selected options. Implementation for the answer parsing will be dis-cussed in the supplementary materials. Our benchmark in-cludes the zero-shot performance of state-of-the-art VLMs and their fine-tuned versions using the training and testing set specified in Sec. 4.1. 

Benchmarks. As shown in Tab. 4, most models–except for LLaVA-NeXT [15]–successfully answer the questions in the desired format, proving the clarity of our ques-tions. Two reasons cause this abnormality: firstly, the VLM struggles to generate in the designated answer for-mat (failure rate of 27%). Additionally, the model fre-quently refuses to answer the questions asked. For exam-ple, when asked with relative distance questions, LLaVA-NeXT typically responds with “...I cannot provide a definitive answer to your question without more informa-tion about the simulation or the specific positions of the ob-                                            

> Model Overall Sim Real Parse Fail ↓
> Random 0.329 0.326 0.332 0.0000
> LLaVA -NeXT 0.295 0.287 0.302 0.2750
> LLaVA -OneVision 0.581 0.550 0.613 0.0000
> GPT -4o 0.628 0.602 0.655 0.0004
> Qwen2 0.539 0.527 0.552 0.0000
> Qwen2 -finetuned 0.844 0.839 0.848 0.0000
> Llama3.2 0.500 0.478 0.523 0.0080
> Llama3.2 -finetuned 0.774 0.744 0.803 0.0672
> InternVL2 -8B 0.592 0.552 0.632 0.0000
> InternVL2 -8B-finetuned 0.869 0.853 0.884 0.0000

Table 4. Visual question answering benchmark . Performance comparison of different models on overall, simulation-only-part, and real-only-part of the withheld test sets, along with the pars-ing failure rate. Models report consistent improvements after fine-tuning, with InternVL2-8B achieving the best performance. 

jects within it.” Visualized in subfigure (a) of Fig. 7, VLMs’ zero-shot performances are significantly better than random guessing, showing the answerability of our questions. As expected, GPT-4o achieves the best zero-shot performance, contain-ing the largest parameters with unparalleled pre-training data. The subfigure (b) of Fig. 7 highlights the improve-ments of VLMs after fine-tuning(with the total test accuracy in the “overall” dimension), with zero-shot performance curves drawn in solid lines and fine-tuned counterparts in dotted lines. Fine-tuning on the MetaVQA Dataset consis-tently improves accuracies in each question supertype, sug-gesting generalizable benefits of learning the dataset. We take InternVL2-8B, the best performing VLM after fine-tuning, for a case study: Fig. 5 showcases questions suc-cessfully answered by the model after fine-tuning. The model gains spatial awareness with a better understand-ing of pedestrians’ projected heading and shows improved attentive power by reasoning about multiple observed ob-jects. Moreover, InternVL2-8B shows improved embodied knowledge: it forecasts the potential hazard of running into traffic barriers and predicts the consequence of its action. Collectively, the improvements in both spatial reasoning and embodied knowledge of VLMs demonstrate the con-tribution of the MetaVQA Dataset, and we will further val-idate its effectiveness in Sec. 5.2. 

5.2. Closed-loop Evaluation 

Task formulation. We use the MetaDrive [12] simula-tor and load scenarios from real-world traffic through Sce-narioNet [46] to create interactive environments for testing VLMs as embodied agents. In this task, VLMs are tasked as the self-driving planners of vehicles. At every five simu-lation steps (0.5s in the wall time), the tested VLM receives a first-person view image annotated in the Set-of-Mark con-vention. The destination, current speed, and allowed actions are provided as textual prompts. Each action is mapped to a fixed value pair of steering and acceleration, which will be 22458 Figure 5. Successfully answered questions after fine-tuning of InternVL2-8B on the training set from Sec. 4.1.    

> Figure 6. Qualitative result of closed-loop evaluation . Case 1 compares the decision-making of fine-tuned Llama3.2 (left) versus its zero-shot counterpart (right). Case 2 compares fine-tuned Llama3.2 (left) versus fine-tuned Qwen2 (right). As shown, fine-tuned Llama3.2 learns to avoid collision. It also demonstrates superior safety capability compared to its trained peers.
> Figure 7. Performance contours of VLMs .Sub-figure (a) il-lustrates zero-shot performances, and sub-figure (b) highlights the fine-tuning improvements. All fine-tuned models perform consis-tently better across questions.

fed into the simulator for vehicle dynamic simulation. Fur-ther details are discussed in the supplementary materials. For generalizable evaluations across varied situations, we augment real-world scenarios with safety-critical scenarios generated using CAT [51], in which an adversarial agent will intercept the trajectory of the ego vehicle. During eval-uation, the trial is considered a failure and terminates if the VLM drives off the roads. Details on implementation can be found in the supplementary materials. 

Experiments Setup. We curate 120 driving scenarios, with 60 scenarios selected from the nuScenes dataset and 60 safety-critical scenarios generated using CAT from WOMD’s [45] training split. These scenarios cover di-verse behaviors such as stop-and-go, U-turn, and crossing intersections. We evaluate learned knowledge gained from 22459 Model Test Accuracy ↑                                                                 

> Route Completion ↑
> Off-Road Rate ↓
> Collision Rate ↓ADE ↓FDE ↓
> random 0.376 0.658 0.375 20.937 15.207
> brake 0.188 0.167 0.533 23.225 44.659
> straight 0.592 0.583 0.358 13.272 12.678
> Qwen2 0.539 0.615 0.583 0.367 13.075 30.214
> Qwen2 -tuned 0.792 0.667 0.442 0.300 14.873 27.973 Llama3.2 0.500 0.529 0.658 0.483 18.335 40.665
> Llama3.2 -tuned 0.757 0.632 0.558 0.267 15.118 31.811 InternVL2 -4B [50] 0.507 0.259 0.850 0.225 24.824 53.020
> InternVL2 -4B-tuned 0.719 0.614 0.500 0.317 14.368 29.943 InternVL2 -8B 0.592 0.637 0.583 0.325 13.361 30.520
> InternVL2 -8B-tuned 0.820 0.657 0.517 0.367 13.109 27.873

Table 5. Quantitative result of closed-loop evaluation . Fine-tuned in the open-loop VQA task only, VLMs also show improve-ments in the unseen closed-loop driving task. 

the open-loop VQA task using the InternVL2 model family, Llama3.2, and Qwen2, each trained on an identical subset of the training set from Sec. 4.1. Noticeably, the prompt format for the closed-loop evaluation is absent from the MetaVQA Dataset. However, the skill sets required for driving–spatial awareness and embodied knowledge–are re-fined by learning the MetaVQA Dataset. Therefore, we ex-pect fine-tuned VLMs capable of adapting to the novel driv-ing task. 

Metrics. For each evaluated VLM, we record the collision rate, off-road rate, average displacement error (ADE), final displacement error (FDE), and route completion ratio. Fur-thermore, we append its accuracy on the test set mentioned in Sec. 4.1 to examine the correlation between open-loop performance and closed-loop performance of VLMs. De-tails on metrics implementation can be found in the supple-mentary materials. 

Discussions. As shown in Tab. 5, all VLMs exhibit non-trivial improvements in route completion, off-road ratio, and FDE after fine-tuning, in addition to improved VQA accuracy. With a few exceptions, models also demonstrate improved ADEs and collision rates in general. We specu-late these inconsistencies are the by-product of varied pre-trainings applied to each VLM. Nonetheless, the improved closed-loop performance of fine-tuned VLMs confirms our expectation: VLMs become stronger embodied agents after learning the MetaVQA Dataset. Fig. 6 provides case comparisons of VLMs in closed-loop evaluation, with the ego trajectory drawn in green while relevant objects are in orange or red. The decision-making of fine-tuned Llama3.2 [19], the safest driver af-ter fine-tuning, is plotted on the left side in both cases. In case 1, Llama3.2’s behavior before fine-tuning is plot-ted against on the right. Without the open-loop VQA pre-training, naive Llama3.2 fails to realize the danger of turn-ing left when a pickup is present on that side, resulting in two consecutive collisions. In comparison, fine-tuned Llama3.2 becomes more aware of its surroundings. It de-duces that the safest action, when surrounded by obstacles on both sides, is to maintain its direction, and it success-fully merges into the unblocked left lane by keeping straight consistently. In case 2, the right side illustrates the trial for fine-tuned Qwen2 [17]. Both fine-tuned VLMs demon-strate situational awareness by merging into the left lane at t=8.5s , when traffic cones are present ahead. How-ever, they improve to varied degrees: Llama3.2 keeps going left until there it is sufficiently distant from the obstacles, upon when it makes a right turn to stay within the road. In comparison, Qwen2 becomes oblivious to the traffic cones to its right, and it decides to turn right when there is no space, leading to collisions. In both comparisons, consisting of four trials, the VLMs receive the same navigation com-mand “forward” throughout the simulation (complying with the ground-truth trajectories), meaning that the evasions are made on the go without behavioral hints from the navigation command. With further support from improved closed-loop evaluations, we are confident in claiming that the MetaVQA Dataset contributes to general-purpose VLMs’ embodied scene understanding. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We present MetaVQA, a large-scale benchmark for eval-uating and improving the embodied scene understanding of vision language models. Besides establishing the base-line performance of representative VLMs, we showcase the transferable knowledge learned from the MetaVQA Dataset across observation domains through sim-to-real VQA eval-uations. Finally, we further evaluate the fine-tuned VLMs in the untrained task of closed-loop driving in simulation, and the significantly improved driving capabilities confirm the generalizability and robustness of learned embodied knowl-edge from the MetaVQA Dataset. 

Limitations. Currently, the MetaVQA Dataset contains only images as observations, but embodied agents might need multi-step historical information to make the op-timal decision in complex situations. In addition, the MetaVQA Dataset contains only single-perspective obser-vations captured from fixed angles, while multi-camera ob-servations could provide more contextual information for better decision-making. 

Acknowledgment: The project was supported by the NSF grants CNS-2235012 and IIS-2339769, and the ONR grants N00014-23-1-2780 and N000142512166. Zhenghao Peng is supported by the Amazon Fellowship via UCLA Science Hub. 

## References 

[1] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding, 22460 Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakr-ishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jas-mine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kan-ishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. 1 [2] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Fos-ter, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kol-lar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 1 [3] Xiaoyu Tian, Junru Gu, Bailin Li, Yicheng Liu, Zhiyong Zhao, Yang Wang, Kun Zhan, Peng Jia, Xianpeng Lang, and Hang Zhao. Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12289 , 2024. 1, 3 [4] Chonghao Sima, Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Li Chen, Hanxue Zhang, Chengen Xie, Ping Luo, Andreas Geiger, and Hongyang Li. Drivelm: Driving with graph visual ques-tion answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14150 , 2023. 1, 2, 3 [5] Yunsong Zhou, Linyan Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jia Zeng, Tianyu Li, Hang Qiu, Hongzi Zhu, Minyi Guo, Yu Qiao, and Hongyang Li. Embodied understanding of driving scenarios. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04593 , 2024. 1, 2, 3 [6] Zhenhua Xu, Yujia Zhang, Enze Xie, Zhen Zhao, Yong Guo, Kenneth KY Wong, Zhenguo Li, and Hengshuang Zhao. Drivegpt4: Interpretable end-to-end autonomous driving via large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01412 ,2023. 2 [7] Thierry Deruyttere, Simon Vandenhende, Dusan Grujicic, Luc Van Gool, and Marie Francine Moens. Talk2car: Taking control of your self-driving car. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-ural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2088– 2098, 2019. 2 [8] Shuo Xing, Hongyuan Hua, Xiangbo Gao, Shenzhe Zhu, Renjie Li, Kexin Tian, Xiaopeng Li, Heng Huang, Tian-bao Yang, Zhangyang Wang, Yang Zhou, Huaxiu Yao, and Zhengzhong Tu. AutoTrust: Benchmarking Trustworthiness in Large Vision Language Models for Autonomous Driving. 

arXiv , December 2024. 2, 3 [9] Xianda Guo, Zhang Ruijun, Duan Yiqun, He Yuhang, Chen-ming Zhang, and Long Chen. Drivemllm: A benchmark for spatial understanding with multimodal large language mod-els in autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13112 ,2024. 1, 2, 3 [10] Shenyuan Gao, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Kashyap Chitta, Yi-hang Qiu, Andreas Geiger, Jun Zhang, and Hongyang Li. Vista: A generalizable driving world model with high fidelity and versatile controllability. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. 1 [11] Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chunyuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 , 2023. 2, 3, 4, 5 [12] Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Qihang Zhang, Zhenghai Xue, and Bolei Zhou. Metadrive: Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-chine Intelligence , 2022. 2, 3, 5, 6 [13] Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H. Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan, Yuxin Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuScenes: A multi-modal dataset for autonomous driving. In CVPR , 2020. 2, 3[14] Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al. Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2446–2454, 2020. 2 [15] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning, 2023. 2, 5, 6 [16] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326 , 2024. 5 [17] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Jun-yang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. 5, 8 [18] OpenAI. Chatgpt-4, 2024. Large Language Model devel-oped by OpenAI. 5 [19] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Ab-hishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bob-bie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, 22461 Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Ko-revaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bit-ton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua John-stun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kar-das, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur C ¸ elebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Gana-pathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Sto-jnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Tay-lor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sa-hana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun So-nia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhos-ale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gu-rurangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, To-bias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vo-geti, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yaz-dan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Mon-talvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Chang-han Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichten-hofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Tes-tuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Di-dem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Ed-ward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Este-ban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Fran-cisco Guzm´ an, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Med-ina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Sho-janazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tu-fanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Man-ish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pe-dro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Ray-mond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Sat-22462 terfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Syd-ney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Von-timitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, V´ ıtor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary De-Vito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhi-wei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. 5, 8 [20] Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Ping Luo, Tong Lu, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14238 , 2023. 2 [21] Dongming Wu, Wencheng Han, Tiancai Wang, Yingfei Liu, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jianbing Shen. Language prompt for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04379 ,2023. 2 [22] Yiran Xu, Xiaoyin Yang, Lihang Gong, Hsuan-Chu Lin, Tz-Ying Wu, Yunsheng Li, and Nuno Vasconcelos. Explainable object-induced action decision for autonomous vehicles. In 

CVPR , 2020. [23] Dongming Wu, Wencheng Han, Tiancai Wang, Xingping Dong, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jianbing Shen. Referring Multi-Object tracking. In CVPR , 2023. [24] Hongyang Li, Yang Li, Huijie Wang, Jia Zeng, Huilin Xu, Pinlong Cai, Li Chen, Junchi Yan, Feng Xu, Lu Xiong, Jing-dong Wang, Futang Zhu, Chunjing Xu, Tiancai Wang, Fei Xia, Beipeng Mu, Zhihui Peng, Dahua Lin, and Yu Qiao. Open-sourced data ecosystem in autonomous driving: the present and future, 2024. 2 [25] Jinkyu Kim, Teruhisa Misu, Yi-Ting Chen, Ashish Tawari, and John Canny. Grounding human-to-vehicle advice for self-driving vehicles. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 2 [26] Ali Keysan, Andreas Look, Eitan Kosman, Gonca G¨ ursun, J¨ org Wagner, Yu Yao, and Barbara Rakitsch. Can you text what is happening? integrating pre-trained language encoders into trajectory prediction models for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05282 , 2023. [27] Srikanth Malla, Chiho Choi, Isht Dwivedi, Joon Hee Choi, and Jiachen Li. Drama: Joint risk localization and captioning in driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Confer-ence on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 1043–1052, 2023. [28] Jessica Echterhoff, An Yan, Kyungtae Han, Amr Abdelraouf, Rohit Gupta, and Julian McAuley. Driving through the con-cept gridlock: Unraveling explainability bottlenecks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16639 , 2023. [29] Xinpeng Ding, Jianhua Han, Hang Xu, Wei Zhang, and Xi-aomeng Li. HiLM-D: Towards high-resolution understand-ing in multimodal large language models for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05186 , 2023. [30] Long Chen, Oleg Sinavski, Jan H¨ unermann, Alice Karnsund, Andrew James Willmott, Danny Birch, Daniel Maund, and Jamie Shotton. Driving with llms: Fusing object-level vector modality for explainable autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01957 , 2023. [31] Bu Jin, Xinyu Liu, Yupeng Zheng, Pengfei Li, Hao Zhao, Tong Zhang, Yuhang Zheng, Guyue Zhou, and Jingjing Liu. Adapt: Action-aware driving caption transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00673 , 2023. [32] Jinkyu Kim, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, John Canny, and Zeynep Akata. Textual explanations for self-driving ve-hicles. Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-puter Vision (ECCV) , 2018. 2 [33] Enna Sachdeva, Nakul Agarwal, Suhas Chundi, Sean Roelofs, Jiachen Li, Mykel Kochenderfer, Chiho Choi, and Behzad Dariush. Rank2tell: A multimodal driving dataset for joint importance ranking and reasoning. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 7513–7522, 2024. 2 [34] Tianwen Qian, Jingjing Chen, Linhai Zhuo, Yang Jiao, and Yu-Gang Jiang. NuScenes-QA: A multi-modal visual ques-tion answering benchmark for autonomous driving scenario. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14836 , 2023. 2 [35] Amine Elhafsi, Rohan Sinha, Christopher Agia, Edward Schmerling, Issa Nesnas, and Marco Pavone. Semantic anomaly detection with large language models, 2023. 2 [36] Ari Seff, Brian Cera, Dian Chen, Mason Ng, Aurick Zhou, Nigamaa Nayakanti, Khaled S Refaat, Rami Al-Rfou, and Benjamin Sapp. MotionLM: Multi-agent motion forecasting as language modeling. In ICCV , 2023. [37] Hao Sha, Yao Mu, Yuxuan Jiang, Li Chen, Chenfeng Xu, Ping Luo, Shengbo Eben Li, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Wei Zhan, and Mingyu Ding. LanguageMPC: Large language models as decision makers for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03026 , 2023. 2 [38] Wayve. Lingo-1. https://wayve.ai/thinking/ lingo - natural - language - autonomous -driving/ , 2023. 2 [39] Jiageng Mao, Yuxi Qian, Hang Zhao, and Yue Wang. GPT-Driver: Learning to drive with GPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01415 , 2023. 2 [40] Xiaoyu Tian, Junru Gu, Bailin Li, Yicheng Liu, Chenxu Hu, Yang Wang, Kun Zhan, Peng Jia, Xianpeng Lang, and Hang Zhao. Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12289 , 2024. 2, 3 [41] Daocheng Fu, Wenjie Lei, Licheng Wen, Pinlong Cai, Song Mao, Min Dou, Botian Shi, and Yu Qiao. Limsim++: A closed-loop platform for deploying multimodal llms in au-tonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01246 , 2024. 3[42] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Anto-nio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An open urban driv-22463 ing simulator. In Conference on robot learning , pages 1–16. PMLR, 2017. 3 [43] Holger Caesar, Juraj Kabzan, Kok Seang Tan, Whye Kit Fong, Eric Wolff, Alex Lang, Luke Fletcher, Oscar Beijbom, and Sammy Omari. nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based plan-ning benchmark for autonomous vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810 , 2021. 3 [44] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elemen-tary visual reasoning. In CVPR , 2017. 3 [45] Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning Chai, Ben Sapp, Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, et al. Large scale interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving: The waymo open mo-tion dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 9710–9719, 2021. 3, 7[46] Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Zhizheng Liu, Chenda Duan, Wenjie Mo, and Bolei Zhou. Scenarionet: Open-source platform for large-scale traffic scenario simu-lation and modeling. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2023. 4, 6 [47] Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv , 2018. 4 [48] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-head, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Doll´ ar, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643 , 2023. [49] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with re-gion proposal networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01497 ,2015. 4 [50] Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation mod-els and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 24185–24198, 2024. 5, 8 [51] Linrui Zhang, Zhenghao Peng, Quanyi Li, and Bolei Zhou. Cat: Closed-loop adversarial training for safe end-to-end driving. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. 722464