Title: STAR-VLM: Spatiotemporal Grounding Vision-Language Models for Motion and Velocity Estimation via Automotive Radar Supervision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.01535v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 02:01:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
> 1

# STAR-VLM: Spatiotemporal Grounding Vision-Language Models for Motion and Velocity Estimation via Automotive Radar Supervision 

Pou-Chun Kung, Aryaman Rao, Utkrisht Sahai, Hemanth Murali, Yi Liu, Rui-Yu Lin, Katherine A. Skinner 

Abstract —Vision-language models (VLMs) are emerging as a key component of embodied intelligence, with growing applica-tions in auto-labeling and end-to-end autonomous driving. How-ever, existing approaches for improving spatiotemporal reasoning in VLMs often rely on complex preprocessing pipelines, expensive human annotations, or synthetic data, which limit scalability and introduce potential sim-to-real gaps. Moreover, although these methods have improved spatiotemporal understanding, they still lack strong metric reasoning capabilities for dynamic scenes, such as estimating object motion in real-world units. Prior work has explored LiDAR-based metric depth supervision to enhance spatial perception, but it does not directly address temporal reasoning. We introduce STAR-VLM, an automotive radar-supervised framework that enhances spatiotemporal VLMs with motion reasoning and metric velocity estimation for autonomous driving. Automotive radar is a low-cost and widely deployed sensor that provides complementary spatiotemporal supervision through range and Doppler measurements. By leveraging these measurements as label-free ground truth during training, STAR-VLM improves the metric spatiotemporal reasoning ability of VLMs. Through experiments on driving scenarios, we show that STAR-VLM achieves state-of-the-art performance on both mo-tion classification and metric velocity estimation, outperforming even task-specific methods designed for each task. These results highlight automotive radar as a scalable and cost-effective source of supervision for building metric-aware spatiotemporal VLMs for real-world autonomous driving. 

Index Terms —Deep Learning for Visual Perception, Computer Vision for Automation, Deep Learning Methods 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision-language models (VLMs) are rapidly emerging as a foundation for embodied intelligence, with growing rele-vance to applications such as vision-language-action (VLA) and end-to-end autonomous driving [1, 2]. By coupling vi-sual perception with language-based reasoning, VLMs of-fer a promising path toward general-purpose systems that can interpret complex scenes, follow high-level instructions, and support interpretable human-like downstream decision-making. In driving scenarios, however, this requires more than understanding static scenes. Autonomous systems operate in dynamic environments populated by moving agents and safety-critical interactions, making spatiotemporal understanding a fundamental requirement. Recent work has begun extending VLMs from static visual understanding to spatiotemporal reasoning over videos and 

All authors are with the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. 

{pckung, aryamanr, usahai, hems, yiliuhh, imrui, kskin }@umich.edu .

Fig. 1. We propose STAR-VLM, a simple yet effective method that leverages automotive radar data to improve the spatiotemporal reasoning capabilities of VLMs for autonomous driving. Existing open-source VLMs struggle with temporal motion classification, and even the latest proprietary VLMs, such as GPT-5.4 and Gemini-3, still face challenges in estimating the metric velocity of moving objects. 

driving scenes. These methods aim to improve a model’s abil-ity to reason about object motion, temporal events, and scene dynamics, which are essential for embodied decision-making. However, many spatiotemporal VLMs rely on complex pre-processing pipelines, costly human annotations, or synthetic supervision, which limit scalability and raise concerns about sim-to-real transfer [3, 4, 5]. Beyond scalability, prior methods also lack strong metric reasoning, especially for dynamic scene understanding. In driving scenarios, estimating distance and motion in physically meaningful units is important for auto-labeling and down-stream driving tasks. Recent work [6] has explored LiDAR or depth-based supervision to improve the metric spatial percep-tion of VLMs without complex data preprocessing and human labeling. The method, DepthLM, shows that external sensor supervision can help VLMs learn stronger metric grounding. However, such supervision primarily addresses spatial per-ception and does not directly provide temporal motion cues. Figure 1 shows that metric spatiotemporal reasoning remains arXiv:2608.01535v1 [cs.CV] 2 Aug 2026 2 

> Fig. 2. Beyond sparse point clouds, the automotive radar provides point-wise motion-state estimates derived from Doppler measurements.

underexplored in current VLMs. In this work, we argue that radar is a natural supervi-sion source for metric spatiotemporal learning in autonomous driving. Radar is low cost, widely deployed on automotive platforms, naturally aligned with the driving-relevant plane, and capable of directly measuring scene motion. In particular, radar provides Doppler measurements for temporal supervi-sion, making it especially well-suited for improving motion reasoning. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate motion state and radial ve-locity measurements from radar, respectively. Compared with manual annotations or simulator-generated supervision, radar offers a scalable, real-world source of physically grounded training signals. Motivated by this observation, we introduce STAR-VLM, a radar-supervised framework for enhancing spatiotemporal VLMs with metric scene understanding. STAR-VLM lever-ages radar signals during training to improve both spatial grounding and temporal motion reasoning in VLMs. By using radar range and Doppler cues as supervision, our framework equips VLMs with a stronger metric understanding of dynamic driving scenes, particularly for driving-relevant objects such as surrounding vehicles. We evaluate STAR-VLM on motion understanding tasks in driving environments and show that it achieves state-of-the-art performance on both motion classification and metric velocity estimation. Notably, STAR-VLM outperforms even task-specific methods tailored to these tasks, highlighting the effectiveness of radar supervision for physically grounded scene understanding. Our results suggest that radar is a power-ful and scalable supervision source for building metric-aware spatiotemporal VLMs, as shown in Figure 1. Altogether, the contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

We propose STAR-VLM, a radar-supervised framework that leverages Doppler signals to enhance spatiotemporal reasoning in VLMs, with a particular focus on the under-explored problem of metric velocity reasoning in VLMs.  

> •

We demonstrate that STAR-VLM achieves state-of-the-art VLM performance on both motion classification and metric radial velocity estimation across our self-designed benchmark and a public temporal VLM benchmark.  

> •

We further show that STAR-VLM outperforms existing  

> Fig. 3. Automotive radar provides relative radial velocity, indicating whether an object is moving toward or away from the sensor, based on measured Doppler information.

task-specific language-free models on both motion clas-sification and object-level radial velocity estimation in driving scenes. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. VLMs for Embodied Intelligence 

VLMs have emerged as an important foundation for embod-ied intelligence, where language-conditioned perception and reasoning support downstream control and decision-making. In robotics, RT-2 shows that vision-language pretraining can be transferred to embodied control by representing actions as text tokens, establishing a strong connection between VLMs and VLA systems [7]. In autonomous driving, recent works such as DriveLM, DriveVLM, and DriveMLM extend VLMs to scene understanding, reasoning, and planning, highlight-ing their potential for interactive and interpretable driving systems [8, 9, 10]. More recently, autonomous driving VLA systems have adopted VLMs as their backbone and directly output driving trajectories [1, 2]. 

B. Spatiotemporal VLMs for Driving 

Recent efforts have pushed driving VLMs beyond single-image reasoning toward spatiotemporal understanding. DriveMLLM introduces a benchmark for evaluating spatial understanding in autonomous driving [11]. FutureSightDrive further explores spatiotemporal chain-of-thought reasoning for end-to-end driving [12], STSBench benchmarks holistic spa-tiotemporal reasoning over traffic scenarios using multi-view and temporal context [13], and TADBench focuses specifically on temporal understanding in autonomous driving with nearly 6,000 question-answer (QA) pairs [14]. At the same time, DriveBench shows that current driving VLMs can produce plausible answers without robust visual grounding [15]. 

C. Metric Reasoning in VLMs 

A complementary line of research focuses on endowing VLMs with stronger metric and geometric understanding. In particular, DepthLM demonstrates that standard VLMs can 3 

> Fig. 4. Overview of STAR-VLM. We project radar points onto the camera image to obtain supervision labels and construct a QA dataset from radar measurements and ego-motion signals for VLM supervision. Each queried radar point is highlighted with a visual marker as a visual prompt.

be adapted to perform metric depth estimation, indicating that explicit supervision can significantly enhance geometric grounding without the need for task-specific architectures [6]. However, existing efforts mainly address the spatial dimension of metric reasoning. Metric temporal reasoning, such as esti-mating object velocity in metric space, remains largely unex-plored in VLMs, particularly in autonomous driving scenarios. 

D. Radar Cross-Modal Fusion and Supervision 

Recent work has explored radar in autonomous driving through radar-camera fusion for detection, depth estimation, and velocity estimation. For detection, methods such as Cen-terFusion, RCBEVDet, and CRKD show that radar provides complementary geometric and motion cues for 3D detection and tracking [16, 17, 18]. Radar has also been combined with monocular images for depth estimation, where prior work uses radar to improve metric spatial geometry through direct fusion or depth completion [19, 20, 21]. In addition, radar-camera methods have been developed for velocity estimation by combining tangential velocity from visual motion cues with radial velocity from radar Doppler measurements [22, 23]. More closely related to our setting, several works use radar as supervision during training instead of as a required sensing modality at inference. For example, DoGFlow and RaLiFlow use radar-derived motion labels to improve scene flow estimation, while R4Dyn and Radar as a Teacher use radar as weak supervision for monocular depth estimation and image-based detection, respectively [24, 25, 26, 27]. In contrast, our work uses radar supervision to improve metric temporal reasoning in a spatiotemporal VLMs. 

E. Camera Motion Classification and Velocity Estimation 

A substantial body of work studies motion understanding from monocular video, spanning motion segmentation, object-level velocity estimation, and dense pixel-level motion es-timation. For motion segmentation, prior methods such as MoSeg, M3Former, and SegAnyMo aim to separate moving objects from background or ego-motion in monocular videos by combining appearance, motion, geometric, or tracking cues [28, 29, 30]. These methods provide strong baselines for identifying dynamic regions, but they primarily focus on segmentation rather than quantitative motion estimation. For velocity estimation at the object level, camera-only methods have also been developed to estimate vehicle motion and velocity. [31] studies relative vehicle velocity prediction directly from monocular video, while [32] leverages temporal kinematic cues to improve monocular 3D detection and addi-tionally predicts object velocity. These methods demonstrate that monocular video can support object-level motion estima-tion, but they are designed as task-specific pipelines rather than general-purpose spatiotemporal reasoning VLMs. For velocity estimation at the pixel level, monocular scene flow methods estimate dense 3D motion from image se-quences. [33] is a representative self-supervised approach for jointly recovering geometry and motion from monocular video, while more recent methods such as Any4D[34] and ZeroMSF [35] further improve dense metric 4D reconstruc-tion and zero-shot monocular scene flow estimation. These methods are closely related to our evaluation setting be-cause they recover physically meaningful motion from camera observations. However, despite their dense predictions, they often struggle to provide accurate metric velocity estimates. In contrast, our work improves metric velocity estimation by leveraging a powerful VLM pretrained on large-scale data. III. M ETHOD 

The overview of STAR-VLM is shown in Figure 4. To enhance the spatiotemporal reasoning capability of VLMs us-ing automotive radar, and to systematically evaluate their spa-tiotemporal understanding, we preprocess radar point clouds and human-labeled annotations to construct QA pairs for both training and evaluation. We describe the design of the training data and benchmarks in Sec. III-A. To investigate effective 4 

> Fig. 5. Projection of radar points into image space with and without the proposed occlusion filter. Point color represents the distance of each radar point. Without occlusion filtering, radar points from objects hidden behind visible surfaces are still projected into the image, which can introduce incorrect training labels. After applying the proposed occlusion filter, points from occluded objects are filtered out.

prompt design for temporal understanding, we present the prompt formulations and input formats in Sec. III-B. The training strategy is detailed in Sec. III-C. Finally, the complete training pipeline for the full model is described in Sec. III-D. 

A. STAR-Bench 

We curate STAR-Bench by leveraging the public nuScenes dataset [36], which contains human annotations and syn-chronized camera-radar measurements for autonomous driving scenes. For training, we use the front-view images and front radar data from the trainval split, excluding the mini split, resulting in approximately 34K training images. For evalua-tion, we use the mini split, which contains around 400 images drawn from diverse driving segments. We construct two variants of STAR-Bench . STAR-Bench-radar is built by projecting radar measurements onto the image plane to provide point-level radial velocity, motion status, and distance cues. STAR-Bench-anno is built by pro-jecting ground-truth 3D bounding boxes onto the image plane to provide object-level annotations, including full velocity, motion status, and distance. When constructing STAR-Bench-radar , we observe that radar’s penetrative and long-range sensing properties often produce returns that are occluded in the camera view. Directly using these points can introduce inaccurate supervision and evaluation labels for VLMs, as shown in Fig. 5 (top). We therefore apply an occlusion filter to remove radar points that are likely occluded in the image, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (bottom). Concretely, for each radar point projected onto the image plane, we search for its nearest neighbor in image coordinates. If the neighbor point is within N = 30 pixel distance and closer in depth by more than τ = 0 .3 m, the point is considered occluded and removed. A similar issue arises for STAR-Bench-anno , since human annotations are provided in LiDAR space. We thus sort 3D bounding boxes from near to far and remove annotations that are occluded in the image plane with IoU > 0.3. We use the center of the bounding box at 0.3 m height as the target point to query VLMs for both training and evaluation. 

B. Prompt Design 1) Pixel reference: DepthLM [6] observes that existing VLMs often refer to a queried pixel using its textual coor-dinates (x, y ). However, their experiments show that many VLMs struggle to reliably ground text-based coordinates to the corresponding image location, even after training. To address this issue, DepthLM proposes using a visual prompt, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In our experiments, we find that this behavior depends on the underlying base model. For example, Qwen2.5-VL is more sensitive to the choice of pixel reference and performs better when visual markers are used, whereas Qwen3-VL achieves similar performance with either textual coordinates or visual markers, as shown in Fig. 6. Furthermore, we find that combining both pixel coordinates and visual markers yields the best performance across different base models (Fig. 6). We hypothesize that this combination provides stronger pixel-level grounding, which not only im-proves the localization of the queried point but also enhances generalization across QA benchmarks that use different prompt formats. 

2) Question-answer design: For joint pixel-coordinate and visual prompting, we render a visual marker on the input image to explicitly indicate the queried pixel, and ask: “What is the radial velocity (in m/s) of the point indicated by the red arrow at pixel (x, y ) relative to the camera?” and “What is the motion state of the point indicated by the red arrow at pixel (x, y ) relative to the camera?” 

During training, we use the answer templates “The point has motion state X.” and “The point has radial velocity Y m/s relative to the camera.” We treat both X and Y as standard text outputs, where X is a binary motion label ( moving or 

static ) and Y is velocity rounded to two decimal places. This design avoids unnecessarily long floating-point responses 5  

> Fig. 6. Impact of different input pixel references. The numbers indicate depth estimation accuracy in the DepthLM setting. Using pixel coordinates as input leads to the worst performance, whereas visual markers such as arrows perform better. Our proposed joint input, which combines pixel coordinates and visual markers, achieves the best performance across different Qwen base models.
> Fig. 7. Illustration of the effect of ego-velocity joint training on motion classification when the model is trained only for velocity estimation. Without ego-velocity supervision, the model cannot determine whether the observed motion is caused by ego motion or object motion. With ego-velocity joint training, the model can compensate for ego motion and infer motion state in the global coordinate frame.

while preserving sufficient precision for our 3D understanding tasks. 

C. Training 1) Training method: We follow SpatialVLM [3] and adopt supervised fine-tuning (SFT) for training. DepthLM [6] also reports that SFT achieves performance comparable to rein-forcement learning, while being substantially more computa-tionally efficient than reinforcement learning. 

2) Radial and ego-velocity cross-task training: Our exper-iments show that radar radial velocity alone serves as an effective supervision signal for velocity inference, already enabling strong performance. Moreover, jointly training the model to predict both object radial velocity and ego velocity yields further improvements in metric velocity estimation, even with the same training data budget. We attribute these gains to the shared spatiotemporal reasoning underlying the two tasks. This joint training strategy also substantially in-creases the amount of metric supervision available to the model. Importantly, ego-velocity supervision can be obtained without human annotation, requiring only ego-pose estimation. We also observe that ego-velocity joint training improves motion classification accuracy when the model is trained with radial velocity supervision. We hypothesize that ego-velocity supervision helps the model better disentangle ego motion from object motion. Figure 7 presents example outputs and reasoning traces that illustrate this effect. 

D. Final Method 

The findings from the analysis inspire us to propose the complete method of STAR-VLM. Figure 4 shows the method overview. 

1) Pixel reference: Unlike prior VLM-based approaches that use either textual pixel coordinates or visual markers alone [6], we provide both forms of pixel reference: pixel coordinates in the text prompt and rendered visual markers, namely small arrows pointing to the queried pixels, in the image. This joint design strengthens pixel-level grounding and improves the VLM’s ability to accurately localize the queried point. After training, the model supports both visual-marker-based prompts and coordinate-based prompts, enabling greater flexibility across tasks and prompt formats. 

2) Architecture and training: We finetune our models from pretrained VLMs without an architecture change. We apply standard SFT with the next token prediction paradigm and the cross-entropy loss on the text tokens. As suggested by [6], no regression or regularization loss is needed in pure vision models. The STAR-Bench-radar data is used as the training dataset for the main model. We also trained a model with STAR-Bench-anno to compare the difference of training using the proposed low-cost automotive radar data and the human annotation. 

3) Resolve camera ambiguity: Following [6], we also uni-fied the camera focal length to make sure the model can scale to different cameras. 

4) Cross-task training: We jointly train STAR-VLM us-ing three types of QA sets: motion classification, radial ve-locity estimation, and ego-velocity estimation. According to Sec. III-C2 and the results in Sec. IV-E, joint training with ego-velocity estimation improves both motion classification and radial velocity accuracy. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Implementation Details 

To simplify experiments and avoid computation overhead, we choose the 4B Qwen3-VL model [37] as our base VLM. We train models with PyTorch on 34k images and ∼900k radar points from STAR-Bench-radar , i.e., 25 to 30 radar points per image, with 4 A100 GPUs for about 12 to 30 hours, depending on the model and stopping strategy. 

B. Baselines 

For spatiotemporal VLM comparison, we adopt the open-source 3B and 7B versions of Qwen2.5-VL [38] and Qwen3-VL [37] as our primary baselines. We further compare against 6

Cosmos-Reason [39], a physics-aware VLM for robotics and autonomous driving built upon Qwen2.5-VL with enhanced physical understanding. In addition, we include DepthLM, the first VLM capable of metric depth estimation. Specifically, DepthLM-3B [6] is trained for the nuScenes dataset, while DepthLM-Pixtral is the official 12B model trained on a di-verse set of datasets. We also compare against task-specific models, including state-of-the-art SegAnyMo [30] for motion classification and Any4D [34] for radial velocity estimation. 

C. Evaluation Benchmark 

To evaluate the spatiotemporal reasoning capability of VLMs for autonomous driving, we construct STAR-Bench QA sets using radar measurements and human annotations from the nuScenes dataset. We further evaluate on the public TADBench benchmark, which is designed for autonomous driving scenarios, to provide complementary evaluations of temporal understanding. 

1) STAR-Bench: The details of STAR-Bench are discussed in Sec. III-A. STAR-Bench-radar and STAR-Bench-anno 

are QA sets generated by radar measurement and human annotation separately. 

2) TADBench: We evaluate VLMs on the motion classifi-cation QA set introduced in [14]. This benchmark defines two prompt formats. The first, Exact Visual Question-Answer (VQA) , uses prompts such as ”What best describes the motion of the vehicle in this video segment? Respond with exactly one full phrase from the following list: ‘Starting’, ‘Stopping’, ‘Turn left’, ‘Turn right’, ‘Change lane to the left’, ‘Change lane to the right’, ‘Straight, constant speed’, ‘Stopped’.” with answers such as ”Stopped” . The second, Multiple-Choice Question (MCQ) , uses prompts such as ”What is the motion of the vehicle in this video segment? Respond with exactly one letter corresponding to the correct option. A. Straight, constant speed B. Stopped C. Starting D. Stopping” with answers such as ”A” .Unlike STAR-Bench, which is used for training, TADBench does not provide explicit pixel coordinates or visual markers in the input image. Instead, the prompt refers to the target object only through natural language, such as “the vehicle in this video segment.” We find that STAR-VLM handles this prompt shift well and preserves strong performance under this less explicit object reference setting. 

D. Results 

Table I summarizes the experimental results. As quali-tatively illustrated in Figure 1, Qwen2.5-VL and Qwen3-VL perform poorly on both motion classification and radial velocity estimation. Although Cosmos-Reason is developed for improved physical understanding, its performance on motion classification and metric velocity estimation remains limited. DepthLM, which is tailored for metric depth estimation, fails to produce meaningful motion classification results, likely because it is trained primarily to reason about and output depth values. Its radial velocity predictions are also inaccurate, likely due to its bias toward depth-centered prediction patterns.   

> Fig. 8. Although SegAnyMo produces dense motion masks, it does not always accurately classify motion at the target pixels. By contrast, STAR-VLM reliably predicts the motion status of the object at the queried location.
> Fig. 9. Any4D produces dense scene flow, but the metric velocity estimation is off from ground truth. STAR-VLM accurately predicts the metric radial velocity of the object at the queried location.

For task-specific baselines, SegAnyMo [30] predicts dense pixel-level motion segmentation. We use the prediction at the query pixel as the output of the method. While SegAnyMo can generate dense and visually clear motion masks through SAM, we observe that it often captures only a single moving object in the scene and may fail when multiple moving objects overlap, as illustrated in Figure 8. Overall, STAR-VLM achieves better motion classification accuracy than SegAnyMo when evaluated against both human annotations and radar measurements. In contrast, Any4D [34] predicts dense pixel-level scene flow from consecutive frames. For evaluation, we extract the predicted per-pixel velocity and convert it into radial velocity. Although Any4D captures reasonable relative motion patterns across pixels, its metric velocity estimates remain less accu-rate. Consequently, STAR-VLM surpasses Any4D in metric 7

Model Types VLMS Size STAR-Bench Public Benchmark Motion Classification Acc. ( ↑) Radial Velocity MAE ( ↓) TADBench 

Anno. Radar Anno. Radar VQA ( ↑) MCQ ( ↑)General VLM Qwen2.5-VL 3B 0.35 0.50 25.03 27.17 0.73 0.49 Qwen2.5-VL 7B 0.44 0.65 20.30 26.84 0.10 0.57 Qwen3-VL 4B 0.46 0.83 N/A N/A 0.63 0.61 Qwen3-VL 8B 0.54 0.62 16.47 26.30 0.64 0.66 Physical VLM Cosmos-Reason 1 7B 0.44 0.63 10.42 11.77 0.23 0.56 Metric-Depth VLM DepthLM 3B N/A N/A 23.16 26.33 N/A N/A DepthLM-Pixtral 12B N/A N/A 21.12 27.92 N/A N/A Ours STAR-VLM 4B 0.80 0.94 1.94 1.37 0.81 0.72 

Task-Specific Models SegAnyMo – 0.73 0.77 – – – –Any4D – – – 2.31 3.60 – –

> TABLE I Comparison across base models, physical VLMs, metric-depth VLMs, and our variants on motion classification and radial velocity estimation. N/A means the model completely fails to output in the desired format. “-” in the table means the model is not designed to do the task. The definition of Visual Question-Answer (VQA) and Multiple-Choice Question (MCQ) in TADBench are explained in Sec. IV-C2.

Training Tasks Motion Classification Accuracy ( ↑) Radial Velocity MAE ( ↓)Motion Classification Radial Velocity Ego Velocity Anno. Radar Anno. Radar Single-Task (Motion Classification or Radial Velocity) Training 

✓ 0.79 0.93 – –

✓ – – 2.23 1.42 

✓ ✓ – – 1.91 1.20 

Joint Motion Classification and Radial Velocity Training 

✓ ✓ 0.62 0.81 4.91 3.51 

✓ ✓ ✓ 0.8 0.94 1.89 1.20 

> TABLE II Cross-task ablation studies show that joint training with ego-velocity estimation improves both motion classification and radial velocity prediction.

velocity estimation, while requiring only radar measurements as training supervision, as shown in Figure 9. 

E. Cross-Task Ablation Studies 

Table II shows the effect of incorporating ego-velocity estimation into joint training. In the single-task setting, the model trained jointly on radial velocity estimation and ego-velocity estimation outperforms the model trained only on ra-dial velocity estimation, benefiting from the additional metric velocity supervision. In the joint-task setting, simply combin-ing motion classification and radial velocity estimation leads to worse performance than single-task training, likely because the two tasks are not directly aligned and jointly learning them increases the optimization difficulty. However, adding ego-velocity estimation yields the best overall performance. A possible explanation is that ego-velocity supervision helps bridge motion classification and radial velocity estimation by introducing ego-motion awareness. This allows the model to implicitly learn ego-motion compensation, leading to improved joint-task training. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced STAR-VLM, a spatiotemporal VLM that leverages radar-derived supervision to improve motion and metric reasoning from video. Unlike existing spatiotemporal VLMs that often depend on human annotations or synthetic data, our approach uses Doppler information from low-cost automotive radar, a sensor already widely deployed in on-road vehicles, as a source of supervision, enabling annotation-free training. Our experiments show that radar-derived motion labels and radial velocity serve as effective supervision signals for learning object motion and metric radial velocity estimation. Moreover, jointly training with ego-velocity estimation further improves both motion classification and radial velocity estimation, indicating beneficial cross-task transfer through shared spatiotemporal reasoning. These findings highlight radar as a scalable and annotation-efficient source of physically grounded supervision for VLM training in autonomous driving. We further demonstrate that STAR-VLM achieves state-of-the-art performance on both motion classification and metric velocity estimation, outperforming even task-specific methods tailored to each task. The current 8

method is limited to relative radial velocity estimation. Future work could extend the method to full velocity or global velocity estimation and combine it with VLAs. REFERENCES 

[1] K. Renz, L. Chen, E. Arani, and O. Sinavski, “Simlingo: Vision-only closed-loop autonomous driving with language-action alignment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 11 993–12 003. [2] Z. Zhou, et al. , “Autovla: A vision-language-action model for end-to-end autonomous driving with adaptive reasoning and reinforcement fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13757 ,2025. [3] B. Chen, et al. , “Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language mod-els with spatial reasoning capabilities,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 14 455–14 465. [4] C. H. Song, V. Blukis, J. Tremblay, S. Tyree, Y. Su, and S. Birchfield, “Robospatial: Teaching spatial understanding to 2d and 3d vision-language models for robotics,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 15 768–15 780. [5] S. Zhou, et al. , “Vlm4d: Towards spatiotemporal awareness in vision language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 8600–8612. [6] Z. Cai, et al. , “Depthlm: Metric depth from vision language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25413 , 2025. [7] A. Brohan, et al. , “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. [8] C. Sima, et al. , “Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question an-swering,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2024. [9] X. Tian, et al. , “Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12289 , 2024. [10] W. Wang, et al. , “Drivemlm: Aligning multi-modal large lan-guage models with behavioral planning states for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09245 , 2023. [11] X. Guo, et al. , “Drivemllm: A benchmark for spatial under-standing with multimodal large language models in autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13112 , 2024. [12] S. Zeng, et al. , “Futuresightdrive: Thinking visually with spatio-temporal cot for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17685 , 2025. [13] C. Fruhwirth-Reisinger, D. Mali´ c, W. Lin, D. Schinagl, S. Schulter, and H. Possegger, “Stsbench: A spatio-temporal scenario benchmark for multi-modal large language models in autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06218 , 2025. [14] K. Cannons, et al. , “From segments to scenes: Temporal un-derstanding in autonomous driving via vision-language model,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05277 , 2025. [15] S. Xie, et al. , “Are vlms ready for autonomous driving? an em-pirical study from the reliability, data, and metric perspectives,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 6585–6597. [16] R. Nabati and H. Qi, “Centerfusion: Center-based radar and camera fusion for 3d object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , 2021. [17] Z. Lin, et al. , “Rcbevdet: Radar-camera fusion in bird’s eye view for 3d object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2024. [18] L. Zhao, J. Song, and K. A. Skinner, “Crkd: Enhanced camera-radar object detection with cross-modality knowledge distilla-tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [19] J.-T. Lin, D. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “Depth estimation from monocular images and sparse radar data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2020. [20] Y. Wang, et al. , “Tacodepth: Towards efficient radar-camera depth estimation with one-stage fusion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. [21] Z. Zhu, F. Wu, W. Sun, Q. Wu, F. Liang, and W. Zhang, “Depth estimation based on mmwave radar and camera fusion with attention mechanisms and multi-scale features for autonomous driving vehicles,” Electronics , vol. 14, no. 2, p. 300, 2025. [22] Y. Long, D. Morris, X. Liu, M. Castro, P. Chakravarty, and P. Narayanan, “Full-velocity radar returns by radar-camera fusion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. [23] H. Jeon and K.-S. Kim, “Pow4r: Point-wise full-velocity esti-mation using 4d radar-camera fusion beyond radial limitations,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [24] A. Khoche, Q. Zhang, Y. Cai, S. Sharif Mansouri, and P. Jens-felt, “Dogflow: Self-supervised lidar scene flow via cross-modal doppler guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18506 , 2025. [25] J. Fu, Z. Xiang, and N. Zhao, “Raliflow: Scene flow esti-mation with 4d radar and lidar point clouds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10376 , 2025. [26] J. Kunz, Y.-T. Ye, Q. Chen, et al. , “R4dyn: Exploring radar for self-supervised monocular depth estimation of dynamic scenes,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04814 , 2021. [27] G. P. Meyer, V. Kurtz, C. Kanan, and D. Anguelov, “Radar as a teacher: Weakly supervised vehicle detection using radar labels,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2020. [28] Y. Huang and J. Zelek, “Motion segmentation from a moving monocular camera,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13772 , 2023. [29] C. Homeyer and C. Schn¨ orr, “On moving object segmenta-tion from monocular video with transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19141 , 2024. [30] N. Huang, et al. , “Segment any motion in videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22268 , 2025. [31] M. Kampelm¨ uhler, M. G. M¨ uller, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Camera-based vehicle velocity estimation from monocular video,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07094 , 2018. [32] G. Brazil, G. Pons-Moll, X. Liu, and B. Schiele, “Kinematic 3d object detection in monocular video,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. [33] J. Hur and S. Roth, “Self-supervised monocular scene flow estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. [34] J. Karhade, et al. , “Any4d: Unified feed-forward metric 4d reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10935 , 2025. [35] Y. Liang, A. Badki, H. Su, J. Tompkin, and O. Gallo, “Zero-shot monocular scene flow estimation in the wild,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. [36] H. Caesar, et al. , “nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for au-tonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020, pp. 11 621–11 631. [37] S. Bai, et al. , “Qwen3-vl technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 , 2025. [38] P. Wang et al. , “Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. [39] NVIDIA, et al. , “Cosmos-reason1: From physical common sense to embodied reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15558 , 2025.