MobiAgent: Dual-Loop Recursive Policy Self-
Improvement for Long-Horizon Mobile Manipulation
Chenzhi Liu1,*
Yue Zhang1,*
Jiehong Lin1,*†
Jianan Wang2
Bo Wang1
Zhongrui Wang3,‡
Xiaojuan Qi1,‡
1The University of Hong Kong
2Astribot
3Southern University of Science and Technology
*Equal contribution
†Project Leader
‡Corresponding authors
Project Page: https://kaiknower.github.io/mobiagent
GitHub: https://github.com/kaiknower/MobiAgent
Abstract: Long-horizon mobile manipulation presents significant challenges due to
compounding execution errors and capacity interference between locomotion and
arm control. While recent Vision-Language-Action models excel at short-horizon
tasks, they lack the hierarchical reasoning required for multi-stage objectives. Fur-
thermore, existing hierarchical agents suffer from rigid sub-task mapping, inflexible
replanning, and a lack of continuous learning. To address these limitations, we in-
troduce MobiAgent, a dual-loop agentic framework that bridges robust deployment
execution and recursive policy self-improvement. During deployment, the Inner
Loop decouples high-level reasoning from low-level control through highly com-
posable atomic skills. It employs Vision-Language models for receding-horizon
planning and visual reflection, dynamically composing skills to ensure robust error
recovery. These skills are executed by specialized flow-matching experts that
share a unified VLM backbone, maximizing reusability while mitigating capacity
interference. Concurrently, the Outer Loop drives automated lifelong learning
by autonomously segmenting and verifying deployment rollouts, clustering them
to discover atomic skills, and continuously fine-tuning the skill library without
human annotations. Evaluations on RoboCasa, BEHAVIOR-1K, and real-world
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of MobiAgent. It outperforms π0.5-TA by 22.5
percentage points on BEHAVIOR-1K and enables robust recovery from execution
failures. Through autonomous data recycling, success improves from 7.50% to
27.50% on RoboCasa and from 32.5% to 57.5% on Astribot S1.
Keywords: Embodied Agent, Mobile Manipulation, Recursive Self-Improvement
1
Introduction
Long-horizon mobile manipulation requires executing complex, multi-stage tasks to achieve global
goals, necessitating the seamless interleaving of distinct behavioral modes including global navigation
and precise prehension. This domain poses significant challenges due to compounding execution
errors and the capacity interference inherent in jointly modeling disparate sensorimotor mappings for
locomotion and arm control.
Recent Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, notably OpenVLA [1], π0 [2], and π0.5 [3], have
demonstrated exceptional proficiency in tabletop environments by directly mapping multimodal
observations to continuous actions. Building on this foundation, systems like Mobi-π [4] and
N2M [5] extend VLAs to mobile platforms, primarily optimizing the navigation-manipulation
hand-off. Nevertheless, these monolithic architectures function predominantly as reactive policies
tailored for short-horizon objectives. In long-horizon scenarios, they lack the hierarchical reasoning
10th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2026), Austin TX, USA.
arXiv:2610.03476v1  [cs.RO]  2 Oct 2026


(b) Dual-Loop Agentic Framework
(c) Real-Robot Deployment
Deploy 
Rollouts
Update 
Policies
Inner Loop  (Deployment)
 
Outer Loop  (Training)
(a) MobiAgent: Planner–Executor–Critic Workflow
Trash can
Soda can 1
Dynamic Planning
Step
Subtask
move_to (trash can)
pick (trash can)
move_to (soda can 1)
pick (soda can 1)
place (soda can 1) in (trash can)
move_to (soda can 2)
pick (soda can 2)
place (soda can 2) in (trash can)
move_to (soda can 3)
pick (soda can 3)
place (soda can 3) in (trash can)
Put the three cans of soda from the 
living room inside the trash can.
Task:
Soda can 2
Soda can 3
Success / Done
Failed /Abort
Replan /Recovery
Error Recovery
Planner
Executor
Critic
place (soda can 
2) in (trash can)
complete
advance
move_to 
(soda can 2)
pick (soda can 2)
place (soda can 
2) in (trash can)
pick (soda can 2)
complete
advance
complete
advance
error
replan
Can dropped
complete
advance
Paper disposal
Bottle disposal
Can disposal
Pour blue particles
01
02
03
04
Figure 1: Overview of MobiAgent. MobiAgent solves a long-horizon picking up trash task by
interleaving dynamic planning, skill-conditioned execution, and critic-guided recovery. The rollout
trace illustrates a failed placement where the can drops outside the trash. In response, MobiAgent
triggers replanning, guiding the robot to approach the displaced can, re-grasp it, and complete the
task. This behavior is driven by our dual-loop framework (bottom left), which couples an online
Inner Loop executing atomic skills with an offline Outer Loop that autonomously curates data for
continuous policy evolution. The bottom right shows real-robot deployment on paper, bottle, and can
disposal, as well as pouring blue particles into a cup.
necessary for semantic task decomposition and struggle to maintain the long-term context required
for closed-loop replanning, fundamentally limiting their autonomy and reliability.
To transcend short-horizon reactive policies, recent research explores hierarchical agentic frameworks
that layer Large Language Models (LLMs) or Vision-Language Models (VLMs) over low-level
controllers [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], typically adopting a plan-execute-verify paradigm. Beyond
their confinement to stationary manipulation, these architectures exhibit three critical bottlenecks:
1) Constrained Planning via Sub-task Mapping: They typically assign an individual, isolated
policy to each decomposed sub-task. High-level planning is then reduced to discrete selection from a
predefined list rather than open-ended generation, inherently limiting scalability and increasing system
overhead as the required sub-task repertoire expands. 2) Inflexible Verification and Replanning:
Stemming directly from this rigid policy mapping, dynamically replanning after a verification failure
becomes highly cumbersome. This inflexibility is particularly fatal in mobile manipulation, where
reflection and error recovery demand complex, continuous spatial reasoning (e.g., dynamic navigation,
distance and viewpoint adjustments) prior to interaction. 3) Absence of Data Curation and Policy
Self-Improvement: The vast majority of these frameworks operate open-loop regarding lifelong
learning. While rare exceptions like RoboClaw [13] introduce automated data collection, the field
still lacks a comprehensive pipeline for unconstrained data curation and recursive self-improvement.
To bridge the gap between robust deployment execution and recursive policy self-improvement, we
propose MobiAgent, a dual-loop agentic system tailored for long-horizon mobile manipulation, as
shown in Fig. 1. MobiAgent decouples high-level reasoning from low-level control based on atomic
skills, partitioning the system into a deployment-time Inner Loop and an offline-training Outer Loop.
2


To overcome the bottlenecks of constrained planning and inflexible replanning, the Inner Loop shifts
the execution paradigm from rigid sub-task policies to highly composable atomic skills within a
receding-horizon control flow. First, a Task Planner dynamically composes these skills on the fly.
By replanning after completing each plan, it swiftly adapts to environmental changes and enables
open-ended plan generation, bypassing the scalability limits of predefined sub-task lists. Next, by
breaking down traditional sub-tasks into finer-grained actions, the Skill Executor employs skill-
specific flow-matching experts built upon a shared VLM backbone. This semantic partitioning allows
diverse sub-tasks sharing the same underlying action to reuse a single action expert, maximizing
reusability while avoiding capacity interference. Finally, a Reflection Critic provides continuous
visual verification to trigger flexible replanning. Operating at this granular level allows the Critic to
explicitly manage the complex spatial reasoning essential for robust error recovery.
The Outer Loop drives the automated data curation and evolution of the skill library, eliminating the
need for manual data curation. First, a VLM-powered Data Curator processes startup demonstrations
and deployment rollouts to autonomously segment and verify trajectory clips with instruction captions.
Next, an Skill Generator clusters these instructions to establish a discrete vocabulary of atomic
skills, seamlessly standardizing new rollout data into this inventory. Finally, a Skill Trainer uses this
curated data to instantiate and continuously fine-tune the skill policies.
To evaluate MobiAgent on long-horizon mobile manipulation, we conduct experiments across the
simulated RoboCasa [14, 15] and BEHAVIOR-1K [16] benchmarks, as well as four real-world tasks
on Astribot S1. On BEHAVIOR-1K, MobiAgent achieves a 65.0% mean success rate, outperform-
ing the task-specific π0.5-TA baseline [17] by 22.5 percentage points, while component ablations
demonstrate the importance of dynamic planning, skill-specific experts, and visual verification. Its
critic-driven global replanning further enables recovery from failures such as object drops and pose
misalignments. Finally, deployment-to-training updates improve success from 7.50% to 27.50% on
RoboCasa and from 32.5% to 57.5% on Astribot S1, validating the Outer Loop’s ability to drive
continuous, annotation-free policy improvement through autonomous data recycling.
2
Related Work
Vision-language-action (VLA) policies for short-horizon manipulation. Recent foundation models
have popularized VLA policies that directly map language and visual observations to short-horizon
robot actions [18, 1, 19, 2, 3, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. To model these short-horizon action distributions,
architectures typically adopt one of two paradigms: models like RT-2 [18] and OpenVLA [1] co-train
web-scale VLMs to output discretized action tokens, whereas recent state-of-the-art approaches like
π0 [2] and π0.5 [3] leverage flow matching to directly generate continuous action trajectories.
Hierarchical agentic frameworks for long-horizon tasks. Hierarchical frameworks typically layer
LLMs or VLMs over low-level controllers using a plan-execute-verify paradigm [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. While effective, they often rely on fixed skill repertoires. For instance,
CaP-X [30] composes predefined primitives but cannot learn underlying continuous sensorimotor
behaviors. MobiAgent instead employs a unified, skill-conditioned VLA for native vision-based
control. Additionally, existing error recovery mechanisms are often rigid; RoboClaw [13], for
example, requires explicitly paired forward and reset policies. Adaptive World Action Models use
future–reality verification [31], whereas MobiAgent performs skill-level verification and task-level
replanning. Finally, unlike most open-loop systems that leave failed behaviors unchanged, MobiAgent
introduces a deployment-to-training pipeline to continuously refine its skills from curated rollouts.
Mobile manipulation systems. Current mobile manipulation systems [32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38], including recent VLA extensions like Mobi-π [4] and N2M [5], excel at reactive control and
navigation-manipulation hand-offs. However, they lack the closed-loop replanning, online verification,
and deployment-driven refinement required for long-horizon execution. Furthermore, state-of-the-art
approaches like π0.5-TA [17] (the 2025 BEHAVIOR Challenge winner) rely on isolated, task-specific
models. Their use of time-indexed stages forces distinct behaviors to share a single prediction head,
causing capacity interference.
3


Global task 
instruction
Current
Observations
Episodic
memory
Skill 
Catalog
0
1
Plan Sketch
Next Subtask
1. move to garage door √
2. open garage door √
3. move to living room
4. pick up container A
5. carry A to garage
6. place A on floor
7. return to living room
8. pick up container B
9. carry B to garage
10. stack B on A
move to living room
Planner
Executor
Shared VLA
Pretrained VLM
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
observation
subtask
pick
place
move to
open
action chunk
2
Critic
Ϫϯ−2υ⋅ώ
Ϫϯ−υ⋅ώ
Ϫϯ
Observation Window
Execution Verdict
Complete
Advance
Incomplete
Retry / Replan
Error
Replan
3
Inner loop
Outer loop
Deployment
Rollouts
Updated Skill
Policies
…
…
…
…
…
…
Skill Generator
Pick
Move to
Open
Place
Data Curator
Skill Trainer
Skill-wise Data
Dpick
Dopen
Dplace
Dmove
Shared VLA
Pretrained VLM
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
Action
Expert
pick
place
move to
open
ޣ
ޣ
ޣ
ޣ
ޣ
Grab container from floor
Grab storage container
Grasp container from floor
Grasp storage container
Go to living room
Go to garage door
Navigate to living room
Navigate to garage door
Pull open door
Pull open garage door
Unlatch door
Unlatch garage door
Put container on floor
Put storage  on floor
Set down container on floor
Set down storage container
Segment
Verify
Caption
Pass
Pass
Fail
Pass
Open
the door
Pick
the box
Move to
the garage
Place
the box
…
…
2
3
1
Figure 2: Illustration of the MobiAgent framework. A dual-loop agentic system bridging robust
execution and continuous policy evolution. (a) The Inner Loop ensures adaptive deployment via a
Task Planner for dynamic skill composition, a Skill Executor utilizing reusable skill-specific policies,
and a Reflection Critic that triggers flexible replanning for robust error recovery. (b) The Outer Loop
drives automated self-improvement via a Data Curator, Skill Generator, and Skill Trainer, which
autonomously extract, standardize, and fine-tune atomic skills from trajectory data.
3
MobiAgent: A Dual-Loop Agentic System for Mobile Manipulation
Task Definition & Motivation. We address long-horizon mobile manipulation, where a robot must
execute complex, multi-stage tasks specified by a global language instruction ℓ. At each step t, the
robot maps multi-modal observations ot to continuous base and manipulator actions at, requiring
the seamless interleaving of distinct behavioral modes like global navigation and precise prehension.
Since monolithic end-to-end policies often suffer from compounding execution errors and capacity
interference when jointly modeling disparate sensorimotor mappings, we propose MobiAgent. By
decoupling high-level semantic reasoning from low-level sensorimotor control, our system enables
dynamic task decomposition, spatial-aware failure recovery, and continuous offline skill evolution.
Dual-Loop Architecture. As shown in Fig. 2, MobiAgent employs a dual-loop agentic architecture
to separate deployment-time execution from offline policy evolution:
• Inner Loop (Deployment): Governs closed-loop execution. It consists of a Task Planner
that dynamically decomposes ℓinto actionable sub-tasks, a Skill Executor that maps sub-
task instructions and real-time observations to low-level action chunks, and a Reflection
Critic that evaluates outcomes to trigger progression, retries, or spatial-aware replanning.
• Outer Loop (Offline Training): Drives automated policy evolution. It ingests collected
rollouts, utilizing a Data Curator for VLM-powered trajectory segmentation, a Skill
Generator for semantic skill clustering, and a Skill Trainer for continuous policy updates.
4


3.1
The Inner Loop: Closed-Loop Agentic Execution
The inner loop performs closed-loop task execution at deployment time. As shown in Fig. 2, it
repeatedly plans the next sub-task, executes a skill-conditioned action chunk, and evaluates the
result. This process continues until the task succeeds or a fixed budget is exhausted. The overall
control flow is not an open-loop decomposition followed by blind execution; instead, it is a recurrent
plan–execute–verify loop grounded in current observations and recent failures.
3.1.1
Task Planner: Dynamic Atomic Skill Composition
The Task Planner, instantiated as a Vision-Language Model (VLM) ΠPlan, shifts the execution
paradigm from rigid sub-task mapping to the dynamic composition of composable atomic skills.
Crucially, rather than generating a rigid, full-horizon plan from a predefined list of high-level sub-
tasks, ΠPlan operates in an open-ended, receding-horizon manner. It is invoked on the fly at specific
decision steps k, triggered either by the successful completion of a preceding skill or by an execution
failure. This formulation bypasses the scalability limits of static planning, allowing the agent to
dynamically compose fine-grained skills to swiftly adapt to environmental changes and perturbations.
At each invocation step k, the Task Planner emits the next active sub-task conditioned on four inputs:
ℓk, sk = ΠPlan(ℓ, ok, Hk, S) .
Here, ℓis the global task instruction, and ok denotes the current multi-camera observation. Hk
represents the episode memory, a running log of past sub-tasks, verification verdicts, and observation
cues (e.g., spatial misalignments) generated by the Reflection Critic. S is the atomic skill catalog,
exposed as an open-vocabulary registry. For the outputs, ℓk is a compact natural-language instruction
for the immediate sub-task (e.g., “pick the red can”), and sk ∈S is a skill hint (e.g., pick). This hint
serves as the critical interface for the Skill Executor to select the corresponding policy.
3.1.2
Skill Executor: Skill-Specific Action Generation
The Skill Executor, denoted as ΠExec = {Π(sk)
Exec}sk∈S, operates as a modular library of skill-specific
policies dynamically indexed by the hint sk. At each low-level control step t within the k-th sub-task,
the Executor routes ℓk and the current multi-modal observation ot to the selected policy, predicting a
short-horizon action chunk of length L:
at:t+L = Π(sk)
Exec(ℓk, ot) .
This semantic partitioning allows the system to specialize policies for distinct behavioral modes (e.g.,
locomotion vs. arm control) without suffering from the capacity interference.
We instantiate ΠExec using the π0.5 Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model [3]. To maximize reusabil-
ity while preserving optimization efficiency, we introduce a decoupling strategy: maintaining a shared
VLM trunk πvlm across all skills while instantiating independent flow-matching action experts π(sk)
action
for each skill. This is formulated as a function composition:
at:t+L = Π(sk)
Exec(ℓk, ot) = π(sk)
action(πvlm(ℓk, ot)) .
3.1.3
Reflection Critic: Continuous Evaluation and Feedback
To prevent compounding errors during long-horizon execution, we introduce a closed-loop feedback
mechanism driven by the Reflection Critic ΠCritic, which evaluates the execution outcomes to decide
whether the active sub-task has been successfully completed, remains incomplete, or has failed.
Specifically, after the execution of every C action chunks (totaling C · L actions), ΠCritic processes ℓk
alongside a stride-sampled observation window xt = (ot−2C·L, ot−C·L, ot). Relying exclusively on
deployable observations, the Critic maps these inputs to a structured decision:
vt, ϕt, ct = ΠCritic(ℓk, xt) .
5


The decision comprises a status verdict vt ∈{complete, incomplete, error}, a follow-up rec-
ommendation ϕt ∈{next, retry, replan}, and a set of observable cues ct for offline audit-
ing. To ensure deterministic control, the outputs are strictly constrained to a legal joint schema:
1) vt = complete ⇒ϕt = next; 2) vt = incomplete ⇒ϕt ∈{retry, replan}; and 3)
vt = error ⇒ϕt = replan. Any schema violation is rejected, and vt is set to error.
An orchestration controller ΠOrch governs the discrete state transitions by applying a deterministic
policy over the validated (vt, ϕt) tuples. Conditioned on a per-sub-task evaluation counter nt and an
upper bound nmax, the transition dynamics are defined by the following mutually exclusive rules:
ΠOrch (vt, ϕt, nt) =







ADVANCE,
vt = complete,
REPLAN,
vt = error ∨ϕt = replan,
RETRY,
vt = incomplete ∧ϕt = retry ∧nt < nmax,
REPLAN,
vt = incomplete ∧ϕt = retry ∧nt ≥nmax.
Operationally, a RETRY command triggers continued execution of the active sub-task. Conversely,
both ADVANCE and REPLAN halt the low-level execution and yield control back to the Planner. To
facilitate spatial-aware replanning during this phase, the Critic’s evaluation logs and spatial cues ct
are persistently appended to the episodic memory Hk.
3.2
The Outer Loop: Automated Agentic Training
The outer loop governs the offline training and continuous evolution of the skill library. It operates in
two primary phases: first, bootstrapping, which initializes the system using domain-specific startup
data (e.g., synthetic trajectories for simulation benchmarks or human-teleoperated demonstrations
for real-world applications); and second, continuous finetuning, which runs offline after episode
termination to curate deployment rollouts and iteratively refine the active policies.
To convert both startup data and deployment rollouts into actionable updates, trajectories are automat-
ically processed via a three-stage pipeline (Fig. 2): 1) the Data Curator segments long trajectories
into candidate clips paired with instruction captions, serving as atomic skill demonstrations; 2) the
Skill Generator aggregates these captioned clips to formalize a discrete set of canonical atomic
skills; and 3) the Skill Trainer utilizes the curated data to instantiate or update skill-wise policies.
3.2.1
Data Curator: VLM-Powered Trajectory Segmenting
The Data Curator transforms raw trajectories into candidate training clips with meaningful sub-task
boundaries via an offline segment-and-verify pipeline (Fig. 2).
Segmenting. A video-capable VLM processes sampled frames from the full trajectory to propose
temporal boundaries aligned with stage-level behaviors. For each segmented clip, the VLM generates
a free-form action description. To ensure precise video clip captioning, the VLM employs a hierar-
chical reasoning process: it first determines whether the segment entails pure locomotion (without
manipulation) and, if not, further infers the specific semantics of the manipulation types.
Verification. A separate VLM evaluates candidate clips against their proposed descriptions using a
rigorous quality-control prompt. This verification process explicitly assesses temporal continuity,
logical skill adjacency, and object-instruction consistency. Segments that accurately realize the
intended behavior are accepted, whereas low-quality or boundary-misaligned clips are rejected and
iteratively routed back for boundary refinement or instruction correction until they pass verification.
3.2.2
Skill Generator: Atomic Skill Clustering
Following trajectory curation, the Skill Generator standardizes the diverse, free-form instructions
of verified clips into a compact, reusable inventory of atomic skills. For startup data, the system
constructs the skill vocabulary from scratch through a three-step pipeline: first, an LLM performs
semantic clustering on the instructions, dynamically determining the optimal number of clusters
without predefined human priors; second, it assigns a canonical name to each cluster based on
6


Table 1: Success rates (%) on RoboCasa Composite-Seen [14, 15]. R0 denotes the base π0.5 policy,
while R1–R6 denote successive deployment-to-training rounds of MobiAgent.
Method
Baselines
MobiAgent
CaP-X [30]
π0.5 [3] (R0)
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
Success Rate (%)
5.00
7.50
18.75
21.25
27.50
25.00
27.50
26.25
Table 2: Success rates (%) on four BEHAVIOR-1K tasks. MobiAgent shares skill policies across
tasks, whereas π0.5-TA uses a separately trained model for each task.
Method
push-radio
dispose-trash
stack-storage
fetch-beer
Mean
π0.5-TA [17]
60
40
60
10
42.5
MobiAgent (Ours)
70
60
70
60
65.0
frequent textual patterns, enforced by a rigorous coverage check to resolve any omissions; third, the
LLM standardizes the original instructions by replacing diverse action verbs with these newly unified
canonical names. For rollout data, the clustering and naming phases are bypassed; the LLM directly
assigns the new clips to the previously established atomic skills and modifies their instructions
accordingly. Ultimately, this adaptive approach transforms raw, heterogeneous fragments into a
controlled skill vocabulary, providing a structured data substrate for downstream policy training.
3.2.3
Skill Trainer: Continuous Policy Evolution
The Skill Trainer completes the outer loop by translating the structured data into executable neural
policies. During the bootstrapping phase with startup data, the Trainer dynamically instantiates
dedicated action experts corresponding to the optimal number of canonical skills identified by the
Generator. Sharing a common VLM trunk initialized from a pre-trained π0.5 model (Sec. 3.1.2), these
experts are subsequently trained via behavior cloning on their respective data clusters to establish
the initial skill library. Conversely, during the continuous finetuning phase, the Trainer leverages
newly curated deployment rollouts to directly update the existing policies, progressively refining their
closed-loop robustness without expanding the model inventory.
4
Experiments
4.1
Main Results
We evaluate MobiAgent in three settings, including two simulation benchmarks, i.e., RoboCasa [14,
15] and BEHAVIOR-1K [16], and real-world mobile manipulation. RoboCasa evaluates multi-
round deployment-to-training improvement using a Franka arm mounted on an Omron mobile
base. BEHAVIOR-1K evaluates long-horizon performance using a Galaxea R1 Pro. The real-world
experiments is conducted on Astribot S1.
RoboCasa. We evaluate on RoboCasa365 Composite-Seen, which contains 16 household tasks
comprising two to fifteen subtasks. Using a Franka arm mounted on an Omron mobile base, we
conduct five trials per target scene and average success across tasks and scenes. CaP-X [30] and the
base π0.5 policy [3] achieve 5.00% and 7.50%, respectively. MobiAgent improves from 18.75% in
Round 1 to 27.50% in Round 3 through successive deployment-to-training updates, before stabilizing
at 25.00–27.50% in Rounds 4–6. The early gains demonstrate the benefit of converting deployment
rollouts into skill-wise training data, while the later saturation indicates the need for stronger atomic
policies and more diverse experience.
BEHAVIOR-1K. We evaluate four long-horizon tasks in OmniGibson [39]:
push-radio,
dispose-trash, stack-storage, and fetch-beer, covering articulated interaction, cross-room
transport, stacking, and repeated retrieval. We compare against π0.5-TA [17], the first-place solution
of the 2025 BEHAVIOR Challenge, which trains a separate model for each task. In contrast, Mobi-
Agent shares reusable skill policies across tasks and composes them through closed-loop planning.
7


Table 3: Success rates (%) on four real-world tasks. Both π0.5 and MobiAgent Round 1 use 100
demonstrations per task. Subsequent rounds refine MobiAgent using approximately 20 automatically
curated deployment trajectories per task.
Method / Round
trash-garbage
trash-bottle
trash-can
pour-blue
Mean
π0.5 [3]
10.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
10.0
MobiAgent R1 (Bootstrap)
40.0
50.0
20.0
20.0
32.5
MobiAgent R2
40.0
60.0
30.0
30.0
40.0
MobiAgent R3
50.0
60.0
70.0
50.0
57.5
(a) trash-garbage
(b) trash-bottle
(c) trash-can
(d) pour-blue
(e) Astribot S1
Figure 3: Representative real-robot evaluation scenes and the Astribot S1 platform.
Under matched conditions with 10 trials per task, MobiAgent achieves 65.0% mean success, outper-
forming π0.5-TA’s 42.5% by 22.5 percentage points (Table 2). The gain reaches 50 points on the
longest fetch-beer task, highlighting the advantage of skill reuse and closed-loop replanning.
Real-world experiments. To evaluate the Outer Loop’s capacity for automated policy evolution,
we deploy MobiAgent on Astribot S1 [40], a bimanual mobile manipulator equipped with multi-
view cameras and proprioceptive sensors operating at 30 Hz. We evaluate four long-horizon tasks
that share skill-specific policies (Fig. 3): disposing of garbage, a bottle, and a can into a trash
can (trash-garbage, trash-bottle, and trash-can), and pouring blue particles into a cup
(pour-blue). Using 100 demonstrations per task, the monolithic π0.5 baseline [3] achieves averaged
success rates of 10.0%. In comparison, MobiAgent reaches 32.5% in the bootstrap round. After
each deployment round, the Outer Loop automatically segments and verifies successful rollouts,
adding approximately 20 trajectories per task to refine the corresponding skill policies without manual
annotation. As shown in Table 3, the mean success rate further increases to 40.0% and 57.5% after
two updates, demonstrating both the benefit of skill-based decomposition over the monolithic baseline
and continuous policy improvement through automated deployment-data recycling.
4.2
Ablation Studies
We ablate the principal design choices of MobiAgent on all four BEHAVIOR-1K tasks. As summa-
rized in Table 4, each component contributes substantially to the full system’s performance:
Task Planner and shared atomic skills. The fixed sub-task baseline does not perform planning.
Each task follows a predefined sub-task sequence, and every task-specific sub-task is executed by
a separately trained model. Thus, semantically identical behaviors are not shared across tasks; for
example, the pick sub-tasks in different tasks use different policies. MobiAgent instead composes
task-agnostic atomic skills, allowing all pick sub-tasks to reuse the same pick policy. Replacing
this design with fixed, task-specific sub-task models reduces mean success from 65.0% to 20.0%.
Skill-specific experts. We replace the skill-specific action experts with a single action head while
retaining the shared VLM backbone, Planner, Critic, and training data. The mean success rate
decreases from 65.0% to 42.5%, indicating that specialized action experts mitigate interference
among navigation, grasping, placement, and articulated-object interaction.
Reflection Critic. Removing the Reflection Critic causes the largest degradation, reducing mean
success from 65.0% to 10.0%. Without visual outcome verification, the system cannot reliably
determine whether an active skill has completed or failed, causing execution errors to propagate
across subsequent steps.
8


Table 4: Component ablations on BEHAVIOR-1K. All entries report task success rates (%).
Method
push-radio
dispose-trash
stack-storage
fetch-beer
Mean
Fixed task-specific sub-tasks (w/o Planner)
50
0
0
30
20.0
Single shared action head
40
40
50
40
42.5
w/o Reflection Critic
30
10
0
0
10.0
w/o Global Replanning
70
40
30
20
40.0
MobiAgent (Full)
70
60
70
60
65.0
(a) pick up ✓
place in ×
re-move to ✓
re-pick up ✓
(b) move to ✓
pick up ×
re-move to ✓
pick up ✓
Figure 4: Examples of robust error recovery. MobiAgent overcomes execution failures through
critic-driven global replanning: (a) generating new retrieval sub-tasks after an object is dropped, and
(b) correcting the robot’s base pose before retrying the grasp.
4.3
Robustness and Error Recovery
To evaluate MobiAgent’s ability to recover from execution failures, we isolate the global replanning
mechanism driven by the Reflection Critic. The w/o Global Replanning variant retains visual
verification but ignores REPLAN signals, restricting the system to local retries of the active skill.
As shown in Table 4, this variant achieves a mean success rate of 40.0%, compared with 65.0%
for the full system. On dispose-trash, enabling global replanning improves success from 40%
to 60%. Across the BEHAVIOR-1K evaluations, 39% of successful episodes require at least one
replan, with successful episodes invoking 0.95 replans on average under a maximum budget of three.
As illustrated in Figure 4, MobiAgent generates new retrieval steps after an object is dropped and
corrects its base pose before reattempting a failed grasp. Unlike a local retry, which repeats the active
skill from the current state, global replanning updates the skill sequence according to the observed
post-failure scene, enabling recovery from failures that cannot be resolved by repeating the same
low-level behavior.
5
Conclusion and Limitations
In this work, we presented MobiAgent, a dual-loop agentic framework for long-horizon mobile
manipulation. The Inner Loop replaces rigid sub-task mapping with dynamic composition of
atomic skills, enabling receding-horizon execution and critic-driven recovery, while the Outer Loop
supports continuous data curation and annotation-free policy self-improvement. Experiments on
RoboCasa, BEHAVIOR-1K, and real-world mobile manipulation demonstrate its effectiveness.
MobiAgent outperforms the task-specific π0.5-TA baseline by 22.5 percentage points on BEHAVIOR-
1K, improves the base policy from 7.50% to 27.50% on RoboCasa, and raises real-world success
from 32.5% to 57.5% after two policy-update rounds on Astribot S1.
Limitations. Despite its effectiveness, MobiAgent has several limitations. First, adding new skills
to the shared VLA backbone may interfere with previously learned behaviors. Parameter-efficient
modules such as LoRA [41], together with continual-learning strategies [42], may support more
stable and non-destructive skill expansion. Second, the Inner Loop still exhibits pose-correction
churn, inaccurate placement recovery, and critic drift under transient visual occlusions. Explicit
geometric perception, including object pose estimation [43, 44, 45] and monocular geometry [46,
47], could improve pose-sensitive execution, while future–reality verification [31] may enhance
critic calibration and failure-triggered replanning. Finally, although MobiAgent is evaluated across
RoboCasa, BEHAVIOR-1K, and real-world tasks, broader task families, environments, and robot
embodiments are needed to further assess its scalability and generalization.
9


Acknowledgments
The work has been supported by Hong Kong Research Grant Council - General Research Fund
Scheme (Grant No. 17202422, 17212923, 17215025) Theme-based Research (Grant No.T45-701/22-
R), and Strategic Topics Grant (Grant No.STG3/E-605/25-N). Part of the described research work is
conducted in the JC STEM Lab of Robotics for Soft Materials funded by The Hong Kong Jockey
Club Charities Trust.
References
[1] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster,
G. Lam, P. Sanketi, et al. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2024.
[2] Physical Intelligence. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. In
Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2025.
[3] Physical Intelligence. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2025.
[4] J. Yang, I. Huang, B. Vu, M. Bajracharya, R. Antonova, and J. Bohg. Mobi-π: Mobilizing your
robot learning policy. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2025.
[5] K. Chai, H. Lee, and J. J. Lim. N2M: Bridging navigation and manipulation by learning pose
preference from rollout. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18671, 2025.
[6] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. ReAct: Synergizing rea-
soning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023.
[7] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence, and A. Zeng. Code as
policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023.
[8] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei. VoxPoser: Composable 3D value
maps for robotic manipulation with language models. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
2023.
[9] X. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Geng, H. Geng, Y. Long, Y. Shen, R. Zhang, J. Liu, and H. Dong. Mani-
pLLM: Embodied multimodal large language model for object-centric robotic manipulation. In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[10] D. Honerkamp, M. B¨uchner, F. Despinoy, T. Welschehold, and A. Valada. Language models
as zero-shot trajectory generators for long-horizon mobile manipulation. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters (RA-L), 2024.
[11] L. X. Shi, B. Ichter, M. Equi, L. Ke, K. Pertsch, Q. Vuong, J. Tanner, A. Walling, H. Wang, N. Fu-
sai, A. Li-Bell, D. Driess, L. Groom, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Hi Robot: Open-ended instruction
following with hierarchical vision-language-action models. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
[12] H. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Song, P. Ding, and D. Wang. VLA2: Empowering vision-language-
action models with an agentic framework for unseen concept manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.14902, 2025.
[13] R. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, K. Chen, J. Wang, S. Wang, K. Hu, M. Yu, B. Jiang, Z. Su, J. Ma, X. He,
Y. Shen, Y. Yang, G. Ren, M. Yao, W. Wang, and Y. Mu. RoboClaw: An agentic framework for
scalable long-horizon robotic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11558, 2026.
10


[14] S. Nasiriany, A. Maddukuri, L. Zhang, A. Parikh, A. Lo, A. Joshi, A. Mandlekar, and Y. Zhu.
Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots. In Robotics: Science
and Systems (RSS), 2024.
[15] S. Nasiriany, S. Nasiriany, A. Maddukuri, and Y. Zhu. Robocasa365: A large-scale simulation
framework for training and benchmarking generalist robots. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[16] C. Li, R. Zhang, J. Wong, C. Gokmen, S. Srivastava, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, C. Wang, G. Levine,
M. Lingelbach, J. Sun, et al. BEHAVIOR-1K: A benchmark for embodied AI with 1,000
everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2022.
[17] I. Larchenko, G. Zarin, and A. Karnatak. Task adaptation of vision-language-action model: 1st
place solution for the 2025 BEHAVIOR challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.06951, 2025.
[18] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess,
A. Dubey, C. Finn, et al. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to
robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
[19] Octo Model Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees, S. Dasari, J. Hejna,
C. Xu, J. Luo, T. Kreiman, Y. Tan, L. Y. Chen, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Xiao, D. Sadigh, C. Finn,
and S. Levine. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Proceedings of Robotics:
Science and Systems (RSS), 2024.
[20] Q. Li, Y. Liang, Z. Wang, L. Luo, X. Chen, M. Liao, F. Wei, Y. Deng, S. Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang,
B. Liu, J. Fu, J. Bao, D. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Yang, and B. Guo. CogACT: A foundational vision-
language-action model for synergizing cognition and action in robotic manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.19650, 2024.
[21] D. Qu, H. Song, Q. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Ye, Y. Ding, Z. Wang, J. Gu, B. Zhao, D. Wang, and X. Li.
SpatialVLA: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model. In Robotics:
Science and Systems (RSS), 2025.
[22] M. J. Kim, C. Finn, and P. Liang. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed
and success. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645, 2025.
[23] X. Li, M. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Yu, J. Xu, H. Wu, C. Cheang, Y. Jing, W. Zhang, H. Liu, H. Li,
and T. Kong. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[24] Y. Zhang, R. Wang, J. Lin, Z. Wang, and X. Qi. Retrieval-vla: Training-free in-context
adaptation for vision-language-action models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1358–1367, 2026.
[25] Y. Pang, B. Zhou, C. Li, X. Wang, S. Xu, D.-B. Wang, M.-L. Zhang, and S. Di. Sci-VLA:
Agentic VLA inference plugin for long-horizon tasks in scientific experiments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.09430, 2026.
[26] Y. Guo, Y.-J. Wang, L. Zha, and J. Chen. DoReMi: Grounding language model by detecting and
recovering from plan-execution misalignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2024.
[27] Z. Liu, A. Bahety, and S. Song.
REFLECT: Summarizing robot experiences for failure
explanation and correction. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
[28] J. Duan, W. Pumacay, N. Kumar, Y. R. Wang, S. l. Tian, W. Yuan, R. Krishna, D. Fox,
A. Mandlekar, and Y. Guo. AHA: A vision-language-model for detecting and reasoning over
failures in robotic manipulation. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2025.
11


[29] Z. Liu, X. Ning, Z. Hu, X. Xie, W. Li, Z. Tang, C. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Wang, Y. Liu, and Z. Pu.
Goal2Skill: Long-horizon manipulation with adaptive planning and reflection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.13942, 2026.
[30] M. Fu, J. Yu, K. El-Refai, E. Kou, H. Xue, H. Huang, W. Xiao, G. Wang, F.-F. Li, G. Shi,
J. Wu, S. Sastry, Y. Zhu, K. Goldberg, and L. Fan. CaP-X: A framework for benchmarking and
improving coding agents for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22435, 2026.
[31] R. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Lin, K. Luo, J. Wang, Z. Wang, and X. Qi. When to trust imagination:
Adaptive action execution for world action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06222, 2026.
[32] J. Wu, R. Antonova, A. Kan, M. Lepert, A. Zeng, S. Song, J. Bohg, S. Rusinkiewicz, and
T. Funkhouser. TidyBot: Personalized robot assistance with large language models. In IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2023.
[33] O. Lemke, Z. Bauer, R. Zurbr¨ugg, M. Pollefeys, F. Engelmann, and H. Blum. Spot-compose: A
framework for open-vocabulary object retrieval and drawer manipulation in point clouds. In
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) Workshops, 2024.
[34] Z. Fu, T. Z. Zhao, and C. Finn. Mobile ALOHA: Learning bimanual mobile manipulation with
low-cost whole-body teleoperation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2024.
[35] Z. Fu, Q. Zhao, Q. Wu, G. Wetzstein, and C. Finn. HumanPlus: Humanoid shadowing and
imitation from humans. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2024.
[36] P. Liu, Y. Orru, J. Vakil, C. Paxton, N. M. M. Shafiullah, and L. Pinto. OK-Robot: What really
matters in integrating open-knowledge models for robotics. In Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS), 2024.
[37] B. Wang, J. Lin, C. Liu, X. Hu, Y. Yu, T. Liu, Z. Wang, and X. Qi. Mg-nav: Dual-scale visual
navigation via sparse spatial memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22609, 2025.
[38] S. Yenamandra, A. Ramachandran, K. Yadav, A. Wang, M. Khanna, T. Gervet, T.-Y. Yang,
V. Jain, A. W. Clegg, J. Turner, Z. Kira, M. Savva, A. Chang, D. S. Chaplot, D. Batra, R. Mot-
taghi, Y. Bisk, and C. Paxton. HomeRobot: Open-vocabulary mobile manipulation. In Confer-
ence on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
[39] C. Li, F. Xia, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, M. Lingelbach, S. Srivastava, B. Shen, K. Vainio, C. Gokmen,
G. Dharan, T. Jain, A. Kurenkov, C. K. Liu, H. Gweon, J. Wu, L. Fei-Fei, and S. Savarese.
iGibson 2.0: Object-centric simulation for robot learning of everyday household tasks. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.
[40] G. Gao, J. Wang, J. Zuo, J. Jiang, J. Zhang, X. Zeng, Y. Zhu, L. Ma, K. Chen, M. Sheng,
R. Zhang, and Z. An. Towards human-level intelligence via human-like whole-body manipula-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17141, 2025.
[41] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen. Lora:
Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[42] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan,
J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
[43] B. Wen, W. Yang, J. Kautz, and S. Birchfield. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation
and tracking of novel objects. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 17868–17879. IEEE, 2024.
[44] J. Lin, L. Liu, D. Lu, and K. Jia. Sam-6d: Segment anything model meets zero-shot 6d object
pose estimation. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 27906–27916. IEEE, 2024.
12


[45] L. Liu, J. Lin, Z. Liu, and K. Jia. Picopose: Progressive pixel-to-pixel correspondence learning
for novel object pose estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02617, 2025.
[46] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao. Depth anything: Unleashing the
power of large-scale unlabeled data. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 10371–10381. IEEE, 2024.
[47] M. Liu, X. Lyu, T. Ren, P. Dai, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Lin, S. Shi, and X. Qi. Foundation-
geo: Learning spatial pixel-wise fields for monocular metric geometry. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 353–371. Springer, 2026.
[48] OpenAI.
Introducing
GPT-5.4,
2026.
URL
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-gpt-5-4/.
[49] Google DeepMind.
Gemini 3.1 Pro:
A smarter model for your most complex
tasks, 2026. URL https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/
gemini-models/gemini-3-1-pro/.
[50] M. Sundermeyer, A. Mousavian, R. Triebel, and D. Fox. Contact-GraspNet: Efficient 6-DoF
grasp generation in cluttered scenes. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2021.
13


Contents
A LLM/VLM Configurations and Prompt Design
15
A.1 Task Planner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
A.2
Reflection Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
A.3
Data Curator - Segmenting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.4
Data Curator - Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
A.5
Skill Generator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
B
Implementation Details of Simulated Experiments
18
B.1
Simulation Environment and Embodiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
B.2
Evaluated Tasks and Subtask Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
B.3
Skill Executor Policy Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C Implementation Details of Real-Robot Experiments
19
C.1
Real-Robot Environment and Embodiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
C.2
Real-Robot Evaluated Tasks and Subtask Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.3
Skill Executor Policy Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.4
Additional Real-Robot Evaluation on Unitree R1D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
D Additional Quantitative Results and Analysis
22
D.1
Data-collection Wall-clock Cost versus Manual Annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.2
Per-episode Runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D.3
Per-subtask Success Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
E
Failure Modes and Analysis
24
E.1
FM1: Reflection Critic False Positives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
E.2
FM2: Bimanual-Coordination Failures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
E.3
FM3: Inter-skill Transition and Pose Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
E.4
FM4: Low-level Perceptual Limits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
F
Comparison with Other Agentic Frameworks
26
F.1
Comparison with CaP-X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
F.2
Comparison with RoboClaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
14


A
LLM/VLM Configurations and Prompt Design
Table S1 details the default foundation models powering each module within the MobiAgent frame-
work. While most components utilize GPT-5.4 [48], the Data Curator specifically relies on Gemini-
3.1-Pro [49] for trajectory segmentation, driven by the need to accurately localize skill boundaries
over continuous video. Because the GPT-5.4 endpoint does not natively support continuous video
input, approximating the recording via uniformly sampled frames markedly degrades temporal bound-
ary localization. In contrast, Gemini-3.1-Pro accepts native video input, ensuring precise temporal
segmentation.
Table S1: Default LLM/VLM models used in our MobiAgent.
Agent
Model
Task Planner
GPT-5.4
Reflection Critic
GPT-5.4
Data Curator (segmentation)
Gemini-3.1-Pro
Data Curator (verification)
GPT-5.4
Skill Generator (aggregation)
GPT-5.4
Skill Trainer
GPT-5.4
For the prompt-driven modules, we employ a unified, framework-level prompt design. Crucially,
these prompts are strictly task-agnostic: they specify the canonical skill set (i.e., the stage hint
used for policy routing) and the verb-frame skill templates, but explicitly exclude any specific task,
room, or object names from the evaluation suite. Instance-specific context is dynamically injected
solely through the goal, history, and observation fields. This zero-shot design ensures that the exact
same prompts are reused without modification across all tasks.
In the following subsections, we provide the complete prompt templates for all LLMs and VLMs
utilized across both the inner loop (Task Planner and Reflection Critic) and the outer loop (Data
Curator for segmentation and verification, and Skill Generator for skill aggregation). Furthermore, all
trailing JSON schemas are strictly enforced via constrained decoding to guarantee reliably formatted
outputs.
A.1
Task Planner
System prompt
You are an online planner for a mobile-manipulation robot.
Given the goal,
execution history, current camera observations, and robot state, choose one
next atomic subtask.
You are called again after subtask completion or a
failure-triggered replan, so the next step must reflect the current scene rather
than blindly resume an earlier plan.
INPUTS
global goal:
<task instruction>
history:
<executed subtasks, outcomes, chunks spent, and Critic evidence>
observations:
<current scene and gripper-camera images>
robot state:
<available embodiment and proprioceptive information>
SKILLS AND INSTRUCTION TEMPLATES
move to:
Navigate to the <target>.
pick up from:
Pick up the <object> from the <source>.
place in/place on:
Place the <object> in/on the <destination>.
open/close:
Open/Close the <target>.
open close:
Turn on/off the <control>, or Press the <control>.
action:
<supported process instruction>.
OUTPUT (JSON)
{ "id":
<string>,
"plan sketch":
[<remaining atomic instructions>],
"prompt":
<instruction matching plan sketch[0]>,
"stage hint":
<supported skill>,
15


"target object name":
<string|null>,
"rationale":
<one short sentence> }
RULES
1. Cover every unfinished goal requirement, including repeated instances.
Count only history entries marked complete; an earlier plan sketch is not an
execution record.
Execute only the first remaining step.
2. Respect the embodiment’s reach and grasp capacity.
Finish transporting or
placing a held object before acquiring another.
3. Navigate only when the next manipulation requires a different station; omit
redundant travel and consecutive navigation steps.
4. On a replan, use the current post-failure scene to identify the object’s
present source and the remaining goal requirements.
Do not repeat a completed
final step without evidence that its state has regressed.
5. Each instruction expresses one atomic intent.
Split acquisition, travel,
and placement into separate steps when all are needed; do not combine several
skills into one policy prompt.
6. Use concrete object, source, and destination names consistent with the goal
and visible scene.
Preserve location qualifiers needed to distinguish targets,
and keep object identity consistent across related steps.
7. Check prerequisites before selecting a step:
the required object must be
available, the target reachable, and any necessary access established.
Omit
already-satisfied prerequisites and do not add actions unrelated to the goal.
8. After a failed attempt, use the Critic’s evidence to distinguish an
unfinished skill from a wrong target or changed scene.
Re-select a supported
step that addresses the observed state rather than inventing a recovery skill.
9. The plan sketch contains the remaining sequence, but only its first
instruction is executed.
Leave retry budgets and overall task termination
to the orchestrator.
Return JSON only.
A.2
Reflection Critic
System prompt
Judge the active subtask from recent labeled camera frames and measured robot
proprioception.
Assess the latest state; use earlier frames to establish motion
and progress.
Do not assume unobserved scene state.
INPUTS
subtask:
{ prompt, stage hint, target object name }
frames:
<labeled scene and gripper views, oldest→newest>
robot state:
<measured gripper aperture and recent base/end-effector motion>
SUCCESS CONDITIONS
Navigation:
the robot faces the correct target station within manipulation
reach.
Seeing the target at a distance or at the edge of a turned-away view is
insufficient; corroborate arrival using the local manipulation view.
Picking:
the named object moves with the gripper, is visibly grasped, or is
identified at the fingers together with a stable, nonzero grasp-contact signal.
Interpret aperture changes relative to the current attempt; contact with a
different object does not satisfy the named subtask.
Placing:
the object visibly occupies the named destination with support,
containment, or a corroborated release sequence.
Gripper departure is not
required for an established handoff.
An object beside the destination, above
its boundary without support, or visibly dropped elsewhere is incomplete.
Opening/closing:
the target panel is visibly in the requested end state,
including when it was already in that state.
Control actuation:
positive evidence of the requested control-state change,
such as an indicator, flow, or control-position change.
Touching a control or
being at its station does not by itself establish completion.
Process actions:
visible tool--target contact and motion across distinct
locations or a direction reversal.
A final contact pose or small ambiguous
jitter is insufficient evidence of the requested process.
OUTPUT (JSON)
{ "verdict":
"complete" | "incomplete" | "error",
16


"reason":
<one short sentence>,
"evidence":
[<camera-labeled or measured cues>],
"recommended followup":
"next" | "retry" |
"replan plan deviated" | "replan keep pose" | "" }
RULES
1. Return complete only with positive evidence; default to incomplete under
ambiguity.
Proximity or gripper motion alone does not establish grasp or
placement.
2. Return error for a clearly identified wrong target or persistent physical
deadlock.
For picking, use incomplete rather than error.
3. Recommend next after completion, retry for unfinished progress, and
replanning for a confirmed deviation; leave deadlock recovery to the
orchestrator.
4. Cite the camera view or measurement supporting each decisive cue.
Use
temporal changes to distinguish progress from oscillation or a jam; a single
frame does not establish persistent deadlock.
Keep the verdict consistent with
the evidence.
5. Cross-check available views when the target or contact is occluded.
Gripper opening alone does not prove placement, and absence from a view does
not prove containment.
State uncertainty rather than infer hidden success.
6. Judge only the active subtask’s observable completion condition.
Do not
require it to perform the next skill’s transport or retreat phase, and do not
treat one completed subtask as proof of overall task success.
Return JSON only.
A.3
Data Curator - Segmenting
System prompt
Segment a robot-demonstration recording into contiguous atomic-skill clips.
Each clip is exactly one atomic intent:
either a TRAVEL (the base navigating
toward a target) or a STATE CHANGE (a manipulation that alters an object’s pose
or an articulated part’s state); the two are mutually exclusive within a clip.
INPUTS
recording:
<composite head + wrist views; each frame carries a burned-in
t=...s playback-time label and the base-velocity readout>
OUTPUT (JSON)
{ "skill timeline":
[
{ "segment id":
<string>,
"start time sec":
<float>, "end time sec":
<float>,
"skill description":
<one-line instruction for this clip> },
...]
}
RULES
1. Coverage:
start at 0.0, consecutive clips touch exactly, end at the last
visible t=...s; copy boundaries from the visible time labels.
2. Every gripper acquire→release cycle on a carried object is split into a
separate acquisition clip and a separate placement clip, with a navigation clip
inserted whenever the base travels between them---never one compound clip.
3. Pre-arrival travel is its own navigation clip; absorb brief approach /
align / idle intervals into the adjacent state-change clip.
4. No hallucinated state changes:
label a state change only when the change
is actually observed, and forbid prep-only labels (adjust, reposition, wait).
A.4
Data Curator - Verification
System prompt
You receive a proposed segmentation of one demonstration---an ordered list of
skill segments, each described by a skill description, a stage hint, and a
target object---and decide whether the segmentation is internally consistent and
well-formed for the stated goal.
You reason over the textual segmentation only;
you do not watch the recording.
17


INPUTS
goal:
<string>
segments:
[<ordered list of { skill description, stage hint, target object }>]
OUTPUT (JSON)
{ "valid":
true | false, "reason":
<one sentence, ≤25 words> }
RULES
1. valid=true only if every segment is a well-formed canonical skill on a
plausible target and the ordered sequence is coherent for the goal.
2. valid=false on a malformed segmentation---an incoherent or contradictory
ordering, an impossible step, or redundant segments that cannot co-occur.
3. Be conservative---prefer valid=false when the segmentation is ambiguous or
under-specified.
A.5
Skill Generator
System prompt
You receive the free-form skill descriptions produced by segmentation across
many demonstrations.
Cluster them by action intent, then give each cluster one
reusable canonical skill name.
INPUTS
items:
[{ item id, description }, ...]
(a flat list, not pre-clustered)
OUTPUT (JSON)
{ "clusters":
[
{ "canonical name":
<short action-intent label>,
"activity type":
"navigation" | "manipulation",
"item ids":
[<ids>] },
...]
}
RULES
1. Cluster by the action performed, not by the task-specific object, room, or
support surface.
2. canonical name is a short reusable action-intent label.
3. Prefer general categories over fine-grained variants---do not split
placing (stack / drop-on / rest-on), acquiring (fetch / retrieve / extract),
or actuating (pull-open / swing-shut) into separate names.
4. Fold preparation / contact / completion phases into the state-changing
skill they support; never leave them as standalone skills.
5. Every item id appears in exactly one cluster.
B
Implementation Details of Simulated Experiments
B.1
Simulation Environment and Embodiment
Our simulation experiments are conducted in the OmniGibson simulator using the BEHAVIOR-1K
benchmark [16]. We adopt the Galaxea R1 Pro, the default embodiment of the 2025 BEHAVIOR
Challenge. This wheeled humanoid features an omnidirectional mobile base, a liftable torso, and
two 6-DoF arms, making it ideal for tasks requiring extensive end-effector reachability, bimanual
coordination, and stable navigation.
The policy receives onboard RGB observations rendered at 224 × 224 resolution and outputs a
32-dimensional action chunk. Task success is rigorously evaluated using the BDDL goal predicates
associated with each activity (Table S2). For evaluation, every (task, method) pair is averaged across
10 random seeds under a fixed scene-reset protocol. Crucially, rather than utilizing long monolithic
trajectories, per-skill training clips are extracted from the challenge’s teleoperated demonstrations via
our Data Curator pipeline.
18


Table S2: Task instructions and main-paper task names for the four evaluated BEHAVIOR-1K tasks.
Task ID
Task name
Instruction
task-0000
push-radio
“Turn on the radio on the coffee table.”
task-0001
dispose-trash
“Put the three cans of soda from the living room inside the
trash can in the kitchen.”
task-0016
stack-storage
“Move the two storage containers from the living room to
the garage. In the garage, place one container on the floor
and stack the other container on top of it (either order is
fine).”
task-0017
fetch-beer
“Bring two beer bottles from the refrigerator to the coffee
table, then close the refrigerator.”
B.2
Evaluated Tasks and Subtask Sequences
Table S2 details the natural-language instructions for the four evaluated BEHAVIOR-1K tasks,
alongside their abbreviated names used throughout the main text. During an episode, these instruction
strings are passed directly into the global goal field of the Task Planner without modification.
Subsequently, Table S3 outlines the representative per-task subtask sequences used to train the
per-skill policies of the Skill Executor in simulation. Each line corresponds to a single segment
tagged with one of the canonical skills (move to, pick up, place in, place on, open, close).
Because the segmentation is highly consistent across episodes, these sequences accurately represent
the structural breakdown of each task.
B.3
Skill Executor Policy Training
The Skill Executor is instantiated as a single π0.5 [3] model. This model features a shared PaliGemma
(gemma 2b) backbone and routes to distinct action experts for each canonical skill, where each expert
is a gemma 300m head. All experts are initialized from the publicly available π0.5 base checkpoint and
subsequently fine-tuned on the skill-specific segment clips generated by the Data Curator pipeline.
Specifically, the six BEHAVIOR-1K skills (move to, pick up, place in, place on, open, close)
are fine-tuned jointly on 8× A100 GPUs using 8-way Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP). We apply
a global action normalizer, and the batch shares for each skill are allocated proportionally to their
respective dataset sizes. Table S4 summarizes the complete training configurations.
The RoboCasa Skill Executor jointly fine-tunes a shared backbone and six skill-specific action experts
using the hyperparameters in Table S5.
C
Implementation Details of Real-Robot Experiments
C.1
Real-Robot Environment and Embodiment
Platform and Cameras.
The real-robot platform is the Astribot S1 [40], a mobile bimanual
manipulator with an omnidirectional wheeled base (3 DoF), a 4-DoF articulated torso, two 7-DoF
arms, and a 2-DoF head (23 DoF in total); each arm ends in a parallel-jaw gripper rated to a 5 kg
payload. The onboard RGB-D suite comprises a head camera (stereo RGB plus an Orbbec Femto Bolt)
as the primary scene view, two wrist-mounted Intel RealSense D401 cameras for active-chunk close-
ups, and a chest-mounted Orbbec Gemini 335; all stream at 30 Hz. Policy actions are issued at 20 Hz
and tracked by the robot’s onboard whole-body controller.
Teleoperation Interface.
Demonstrations are collected with the S1’s native VR teleoperation
system [40]: a Meta Quest 3S headset with handheld controllers drives the robot through paired
first-person (fine manipulation) and third-person (whole-body, low-latency) views. The operator
commands per-arm end-effector delta poses in an egocentric frame together with base, torso, head,
19


Table S3: Representative verbatim subtask sequences for the four BEHAVIOR-1K tasks.
Task
Subtask Sequence (verbatim)
push-radio
1. move to radio
2. pick up radio from coffee table
3. press radio
4. place radio on coffee table
dispose-trash
1. move to trash can
2. pick up trash can from floor
3. move to can of soda
4. pick up can of soda from floor
5. place can of soda in trash can
6. move to can of soda
7. pick up can of soda from floor
8. place can of soda in trash can
9. move to can of soda
10. pick up can of soda from floor
11. place can of soda in trash can
12. place trash can on floor
stack-storage
1. move to door
2. open door
3. move to storage container
4. pick up storage container from floor
5. move to floor
6. place storage container on floor
7. move to storage container
8. pick up storage container from floor
9. move to floor
10. place storage container on storage container
fetch-beer
1. move to refrigerator
2. open refrigerator
3. pick up beer bottles from refrigerator
4. move to coffee table
5. place beer bottles on coffee table
6. move to refrigerator
7. close refrigerator
Table S4: Training hyperparameters for the per-skill π0.5 fine-tuning in simulation (BEHAVIOR-1K).
Setting
Simulation
Precision
bfloat16
Batch size
480
Training steps
50,000
Warmup steps
1,000
Learning rate
1 × 10−4
and gripper targets—a 34-dimensional action with an SO(3) rotation parameterisation, streamed at
100 Hz, which is exactly the action space the Skill Executor’s skill policies predict at deployment.
Demonstrations are processed through the same data curation pipeline used in simulation.
Evaluation.
10 trials per task per method, evaluated under a fixed scene-reset protocol; success
criteria mirror BDDL goals. Operator interventions are logged for the HIC metric; an intervention
is required only on hard physical safety violations. Figure S1 shows a time-ordered rollout of each
real-robot task.
20


(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
move to the garbage
pick up the garbage
move to the table
move to the bottle
pick up the garbage
move to the trash can
place the garbage
Done
pick up the can
move to the trash can
place the can
Done
pick up the bottle
move to the trash can
place the bottle
Done
pick up the bottle
pour the blue particles
place the bottle
Done
Figure S1: Real-robot rollouts on the Astribot S1, one task per row, with head-camera frames in
temporal order (left to right) and the executed skill labelled under each frame. (a) trash-garbage:
pick up the garbage and place it in the trash can. (b) trash-can: pick up the can and place it in the
trash can. (c) trash-bottle: pick up the bottle and place it in the trash can. (d) pour-blue: pick
up the bottle and pour the blue particles into the cup.
Table S5: Training hyperparameters for the RoboCasa Skill Executor.
Setting
RoboCasa
Precision
bfloat16
Batch size
48
Training steps
25,000
Warmup steps
1,000
Learning rate
2.5 × 10−5
C.2
Real-Robot Evaluated Tasks and Subtask Sequences
Table S6 details the natural-language instructions for the four evaluated real-robot tasks, alongside
their abbreviated names used throughout the text. During an episode, these instruction strings are
passed directly into the global goal field of the Task Planner without modification. Subsequently, the
table also outlines the verbatim per-task subtask sequences used to train the per-skill policies of the
Skill Executor in the real world. Each line corresponds to a single segment tagged with one of the
canonical skills (move to, pick up, place in, place on, pour).
C.3
Skill Executor Policy Training
The Skill Executor is a single π0.5 [3] model that exposes one action expert per canonical skill behind
a shared PaliGemma (gemma 2b) backbone; each expert is a gemma 300m head. All experts are
initialised from the public π0.5 base checkpoint and trained on the skill-only segment clips emitted
by the Data Curator pipeline. Table S7 reports the training configuration. On the Astribot S1, the
Skill Executor is a single five-skill model (move to, pick up, place in, place on, pour) trained
on the combined trash and pour-blue skill clips. Real-robot runs freeze the vision backbone, use a
per-timestamp action normaliser, and fit on 4× A100 GPUs.
C.4
Additional Real-Robot Evaluation on Unitree R1D
We further evaluate MobiAgent on the Unitree R1D on home-clean, a multi-stage household task
involving door opening, bottle collection and disposal, and table cleaning. MobiAgent (Round 1)
21


Table S6: Real-robot tasks and their corresponding subtask sequences. The prompt column is used
identically as the Task Planner’s deployment prompt and as the per-skill training prompt. The full
subtask sequence for each task is given verbatim.
Task ID
Prompt
Subtask Sequence (verbatim)
trash-garbage
Pick up the garbage and place it in
the trash can.
1. move to the garbage
2. pick up the garbage
3. move to the trash can while carrying the garbage
4. place the garbage in the trash can
trash-bottle
Pick up the bottle and place it in the
trash can.
1. move to the bottle
2. pick up the bottle
3. move to the trash can while carrying the bottle
4. place the bottle in the trash can
trash-can
Pick up the can and place it in the
trash can.
1. move to the can
2. pick up the can
3. move to the trash can while carrying the can
4. place the can in the trash can
pour-blue
Pick up the bottle containing blue
particles and pour the blue particles
into the cup.
1. move to the table
2. pick up the bottle containing blue particles
3. pour the blue particles into the cup
4. place the bottle on the table
Table S7: Training hyperparameters for the per-skill π0.5 fine-tuning on the real robot (Astribot S1).
Setting
Real robot (S1)
Precision
bfloat16
Batch size
240
Training steps
20,000
Warmup steps
100
Learning rate
5 × 10−5
achieves 20.0% task success, compared with 0.0% for the base π0.5 policy. Representative execution
snapshots are shown in Figure S2.
D
Additional Quantitative Results and Analysis
This section reports three quantitative analyses that complement the main experiments of Section 4
of the main paper but were moved out of the main body for space: the wall-clock cost of the Data
Curator loop relative to manual annotation, the per-episode runtime cost of the agentic loop relative
to the end-to-end baseline, and a detailed per-subtask success rate analysis.
D.1
Data-collection Wall-clock Cost versus Manual Annotation
We compare the data-processing step that turns a raw demo into a usable per-skill clip (training
excluded), starting both sources from the same teleoperated demos at equivalent clip quality. Manual
processing is charged at the demo played back at 2× speed (∼2.2 min per clip); MobiAgent’s outer
loop is charged at its measured end-to-end API wall-clock on the same demos. At 800 clips this is a
∼35× reduction (Figure S3).
D.2
Per-episode Runtime
Table S8 compares MobiAgent’s per-episode runtime against the π0.5-TA end-to-end baseline [17]
on successful rollouts. For MobiAgent, the total runtime comprises the physical action execution
time (policy inference plus physics stepping) and the VLM API time. While MobiAgent’s action
execution time is moderately higher than the baseline due to running finer-grained skill chunks with
22


Figure S2: Representative views of the Unitree R1D home-clean experiment, illustrating door
interaction, bottle collection and disposal, and table cleaning.
Figure S3: Data-processing wall-clock time vs. number of processed clips across all four tasks.
At 800 clips, manual annotation requires ∼28.9 h compared to MobiAgent’s ∼0.82 h (a ∼35×
speedup).
per-chunk verification, the primary bottleneck is the VLM API overhead, which is the necessary
cost of the closed-loop reasoning that drives its success-rate and robustness gains (Section 4 of the
main paper). To mitigate this latency in future deployments, potential solutions include asynchronous
processing, where VLM API calls for verification and high-level planning are executed concurrently
with the robot’s physical actions, effectively hiding the API latency and significantly reducing the
total per-episode runtime.
Table S8: Comparison of per-episode runtime (in seconds) for successful rollouts across the four
BEHAVIOR-1K tasks. For MobiAgent, the total runtime is the sum of the action execution time
(policy inference and physics stepping, excluding rendering) and the VLM API time. The π0.5-TA
baseline operates end-to-end without API calls.
π0.5-TA
MobiAgent (ours)
Task
Total Runtime
Action Exec.
API
Total Runtime
push-radio
60
81
98
179
dispose-trash
249
334
381
715
stack-storage
525
707
747
1454
fetch-beer
538
764
792
1556
23


Table S9: Per-skill success rates (%) of the Skill Executor in both simulation and real-world de-
ployments, evaluated on instances successfully reached during execution. The “–” symbol denotes
skills that are exclusive to one domain (e.g., open/close are simulation-only, whereas pour is
real-world-only).
Atomic Skill
Simulation SR (%)
Real SR (%)
move to
100.00
100.00
pick up
88.57
70.00
place in
75.00
94.73
place on
100.00
100.00
open
86.67
–
close
100.00
–
pour
–
50.00
D.3
Per-subtask Success Rate
Table S9 reports the Skill Executor’s per-subtask success rate by canonical skill, in simulation and on
the real robot, helping to localize where the closed loop’s residual failures concentrate.
E
Failure Modes and Analysis
To better understand the limitations of our system, we categorize the observed execution errors into
four distinct failure modes (FM1–FM4), each mapping to specific operational bottlenecks. Specifi-
cally, FM1 (Reflection Critic False Positives) involves high-level evaluation errors where the critic
incorrectly assumes a subtask is complete (often due to occlusion or timing issues), causing down-
stream failures. FM2 (Bimanual-Coordination Failures) captures synchronization breakdowns in
tightly coupled two-arm tasks, arising because the arms are not explicitly conditioned on each other’s
states. FM3 (Inter-skill Handoff Pose Mismatch) addresses terminal-pose misalignments during
sequential skill transitions, where an off-distribution ending pose of one skill derails the execution
of the next. Finally, FM4 (Low-level Perceptual Limits) highlights sensing and representation
shortcomings when the system deals with complex spatial layouts or transparent objects.
E.1
FM1: Reflection Critic False Positives
A false positive occurs when the Reflection Critic incorrectly evaluates an incomplete subtask
as complete, causing the episode to advance based on a flawed premise. Although the critic’s
conservative design makes these errors rarer than false negatives, they are significantly more costly
because the initial error cascades through all downstream subtasks. A typical manifestation of this
issue is a timing error, such as terminating a move to action prematurely. As illustrated in Figure S4,
the critic erroneously approves the robot’s approach to the trash can while it is still slightly out of
range. Consequently, the subsequent pick up action is physically impossible to execute; the robot
repeatedly attempts to grasp the can until its retry budget is exhausted, leaving the object untouched
on the floor. Fortunately, the system’s closed-loop architecture provides a natural fallback: the
inevitable failure of the downstream subtask (e.g., the failed pick up) will eventually be detected by
the Reflection Critic, which will then trigger a re-planning phase to recover from the stalled state.
E.2
FM2: Bimanual-Coordination Failures
Several subtasks require coordinated bimanual actions. However, because the Skill Executor drives
both arms from a single head without explicitly conditioning on the partner arm’s state, tightly
coupled two-arm motions often suffer from poor synchronization. As illustrated in Figure S5, three
recurring failure modes highlight this limitation: (a) In fetch-beer, the robot must hold one bottle
in one gripper while retrieving a second from the refrigerator. The lack of coordination often causes
the reaching arm to knock over the second bottle rather than grasping it cleanly. (b) In push-radio,
the picking arm grasps the radio in an arbitrary, convenient orientation, which frequently leaves the
24


Figure S4: FM1: Reflection Critic completion-timing error on dispose-trash (head-camera frames,
left to right). Having accepted the move to while the robot was still too far, the subsequent pick up
reaches repeatedly but cannot grasp the out-of-range can, which stays on the floor until the retry
budget is exhausted.
(a) fetch-beer: Poor coordination knocking over the second bottle
(b) push-radio: Fragile in-hand reorientation for cross-hand press
(c) stack-storage: Asymmetric two-arm grasp causing lopsided lift
Figure S5: FM2: Bimanual-coordination failures across three tasks. (a) The two arms are poorly
coordinated, knocking over the target. (b) The picking arm must flip the radio in-hand, frequently
dropping it. (c) Only one gripper secures the large container, causing it to tilt and derailing subsequent
stacking.
power button facing away from the pressing arm. This necessitates a fragile in-hand reorientation
or hand-over, making it a common source of dropped or misaligned radios. (c) In stack-storage,
the storage container is too large for a single gripper and requires a simultaneous bimanual grasp.
When only one gripper secures it, the container is lifted unevenly, which subsequently derails the
carry (move to) and stacking (place on) subtasks. In future work, this limitation could potentially
be addressed by introducing more constrained, arm-specific subtask descriptions and generating
corresponding targeted training data to better supervise tightly coupled bimanual coordination.
E.3
FM3: Inter-skill Transition and Pose Mismatch
A primary challenge in modular policy execution lies in the skill transition phase. While training per-
skill policies in isolation significantly improves learning efficiency, it inherently assumes a roughly
canonical starting configuration for each skill. Consequently, during the transition between skills, if
25


Figure S6: FM3: Inter-skill handoff pose mismatch on dispose-trash (head-camera frames, left
to right). The pick up grasps the can off the floor and succeeds, but ends with the arm raised and
rotated away from the carried bin; the next place in inherits this pose, cannot bring the can over the
bin opening, and the placement fails.
the preceding skill achieves its functional goal but leaves the manipulator in an out-of-distribution
(OOD) pose, the subsequent skill inherits this unfamiliar state and may fail despite no explicit error
occurring upstream. Figure S6 illustrates this transition bottleneck in a dispose-trash episode: the
pick up skill successfully grasps the soda can (top row) but terminates in an awkward pose, raised
and rotated away from the bin. The subsequent place in skill (bottom row) initializes from this
misaligned configuration and fails to navigate the can over the bin opening. Because the Reflection
Critic currently evaluates each subtask strictly against its isolated goal, the successful pick up is
accepted, and the kinematic deviation only manifests during the transition to the next step.
To address this transition bottleneck in future work, the agent framework could be enhanced with
transition-aware mechanisms. At the system level, we could dynamically insert a transitional
reset pose or reorient skill between highly misaligned subtasks to bridge the kinematic gap.
Alternatively, the Reflection Critic could be augmented to evaluate not just subtask completion,
but also the kinematic viability of the handoff state for the upcoming transition. At the policy
level, injecting starting-state noise during skill training would also improve the downstream policy’s
robustness to imperfect transitions.
E.4
FM4: Low-level Perceptual Limits
The shared per-skill policies inherit the perceptual limitations of the underlying action expert, which
prominently surface in two real-robot tasks (see Figure S7). In trash-bottle (a), inadequate spatial
and metric perception causes the policy to misjudge the relative position of the trash bin, leading the
robot to release the bottle just outside the rim so that it falls onto the floor. In pour-blue (b), the
clear glass is difficult to localize against the bright table surface; consequently, the policy misaligns
the bottle and pours the liquid next to the glass rather than into it. Both failures stem fundamentally
from the sensing and representational bottlenecks of the current action expert. Moving forward, these
limitations could be addressed by enhancing the dedicated perception module (e.g., incorporating
explicit 3D representations or depth sensing). Furthermore, owing to the modular design of our agent
framework, any future enhancements in state-of-the-art Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policies can
be seamlessly integrated, allowing the system to effortlessly inherit stronger perceptual and spatial
reasoning capabilities without requiring architectural overhauls.
F
Comparison with Other Agentic Frameworks
F.1
Comparison with CaP-X
CaP-X [30] is a concurrent Code-as-Policy framework: a coding agent (a VLM) synthesises an
executable program that composes perception primitives (open-vocabulary segmentation and pointing)
and control primitives to drive the robot. On its mobile embodiment the only manipulation primitive
is a grasp: sample grasp pose runs a learned 6-DoF grasp-pose network (Contact-GraspNet [50])
on the segmented object’s depth point cloud, falling back to top-down / bounding-box heuristic
grasps when the network returns none, and the program tries the returned candidates one at a time
26


(a) trash-bottle: Weak spatial perception misjudging bin position
(b) pour-blue: Transparent-object perception failure
Figure S7: FM4: Low-level perceptual limits on the real robot. (a) The policy misjudges the bin’s
spatial configuration, dropping the bottle on the floor instead of inside. (b) The clear glass is hard to
localise, causing the liquid to be poured onto the table beside the glass.
Table S10: Comparison with CaP-X [30] on the two tasks within its navigate-and-grasp repertoire
(10 trials each, held-out test scenes, matched observations and embodiment). Navigation and task
(including navigation) success are reported separately (%), following CaP-X’s protocol.
CaP-X [30]
MobiAgent (ours)
Task
Navigation SR
Task SR
Navigation SR
Task SR
push-radio
100
20
100
90
dispose-trash
90
80
100
100
(motion-plan to the pre-grasp pose, close the gripper, lift) until one holds. Its mobile primitive set is
thus just navigation, this one-shot grasp, and gripper open/close: it exposes no place, open/close,
or press primitive, so it cannot release into a receptacle, stack an object, or actuate an articulated
object, and therefore cannot carry a long-horizon task to completion. CaP-X’s own BEHAVIOR
evaluation reflects this: it reduces its two mobile tasks to “pick up the radio” and “pick up a soda
can” (navigate + grasp only). We accordingly compare on exactly the navigate-and-grasp portion
of those two tasks (push-radio and dispose-trash). Following CaP-X’s own protocol we report
navigation success (the robot reaches within ∼1 m of the target) and task (grasp) success separately,
over 10 trials per task under matched observations and embodiment (Table S10). Our 10 trials use
held-out test scenes unseen in training, whereas CaP-X’s original 25-scene protocol drew from the
training split; since MobiAgent is learned and CaP-X is training-free, this makes the comparison
conservative for us. CaP-X navigates reliably but grasping is its bottleneck; MobiAgent both navigates
and grasps reliably and additionally executes the subsequent press/place in steps that complete
each task, which CaP-X cannot attempt.
F.2
Comparison with RoboClaw
We also examine RoboClaw [13], a concurrent agentic framework designed for scalable long-
horizon tasks. RoboClaw unifies data collection, policy learning, and task execution under a single
VLM-driven controller, utilizing Entangled Action Pairs (EAP) to form self-resetting learned policy
primitives. Despite its robust multi-policy orchestration, it cannot be applied directly to our skill-
conditioned policy due to a fundamental architectural mismatch. RoboClaw’s planner decomposes
tasks into coarse, monolithic subtasks (e.g., an entire “pick →navigate →place” composite issued as
a single prompt; see Table S11). Because a single RoboClaw instruction spans multiple MobiAgent’s
atomic skills simultaneously, its plans cannot be routed to our skill-conditioned experts without
27


Table S11: RoboClaw’s planner decomposition of the four evaluated tasks (verbatim subtask prompts
from its run logs). Each subtask is a coarse composite that already bundles several of MobiAgent’s
atomic skills (e.g. move to + pick up + place in).
Task
RoboClaw subtask prompts (verbatim)
push-radio (2)
1. Move both arms clear, visually locate the radio on the coffee table in the living
room, and position yourself so one gripper can safely reach the radio power
control.
2. Use the most suitable gripper to press or toggle the radio’s power control on
the coffee table until the radio turns on.
dispose-trash (3)
1. Pick up one soda can from the living room, move to the kitchen trash can, and
drop the can into the trash. Finish with empty grippers and do not pick a second
can in the same run.
2. Pick up one remaining soda can from the living room, move to the kitchen
trash can, and drop the can into the trash. Finish with empty grippers and do not
pick another can in the same run.
3. Pick up the last remaining soda can from the living room, move to the kitchen
trash can, and drop the can into the trash. Finish with empty grippers.
stack-storage (2)
1. Pick up one storage box in the living room, carry or move it to the garage, and
place it stably on the garage floor where it can serve as the base for stacking.
2. Pick up the remaining storage box in the living room, move it to the garage,
align it above the first box already on the garage floor, and place it stably on top.
fetch-beer (5)
1. Open the fridge door, grasp one bottle of beer from inside the fridge, and take
it out securely.
2. Place the beer bottle you are holding onto the coffee table in a stable upright
position.
3. Return to the open fridge, grasp a second bottle of beer from inside the fridge,
and take it out securely.
4. Place the second beer bottle onto the coffee table in a stable upright position
near the first bottle.
5. Close the fridge door fully without disturbing the bottles on the coffee table.
finer re-segmentation. Consequently, we report this architectural divergence rather than a direct
head-to-head quantitative comparison.
Static plan-then-execute vs. dynamic re-planning.
The two frameworks also differ fundamentally
in when planning occurs (Table S12). While RoboClaw’s VLM dynamically orchestrates its EAP
primitives, at the macro-task level it employs a static, plan-then-execute approach: it generates the full
ordered plan upfront and executes it unchanged, only triggering a re-plan if a subtask’s success check
fails. In contrast, MobiAgent dynamically re-invokes the Task Planner at every step to determine the
next subtask based on the current observation. This continuous adaptation, rather than relying solely
on failure-triggered corrections, is the architectural driver behind MobiAgent’s superior robustness.
Robustness to instruction paraphrasing.
A reliable long-horizon system should produce con-
sistent task decompositions for semantically equivalent instructions. To evaluate this, we hold the
task goal fixed and reword its instruction into three distinct paraphrases (Table S14). We feed each
phrasing to both planners using the same GPT-5.4 backbone and starting frame, and record the
number and structure of the emitted subtasks. Table S15 reproduces every emitted plan verbatim,
while Table S13 summarises the subtask counts.
The results highlight a stark contrast in paraphrase robustness. As quantified in Table S13, MobiAgent
emits a near-constant number of subtasks across different phrasings (with the only minor deviation
being a redundant per-bottle cycle elicited by one fetch-beer wording). Its atomic steps remain
fixed in number and order; only the object wording adapts to the instruction (e.g., trash can vs.
kitchen bin, fridge vs. refrigerator). Conversely, RoboClaw’s free-form subtasks fluctuate widely in
both count and granularity across all tasks, particularly on dispose-trash.
28


Table S12: Comparison of planning paradigms. RoboClaw employs a static, plan-then-execute
approach with conditional recovery, whereas MobiAgent continuously re-plans at every step for
dynamic adaptation.
Execution Phase
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
Task Initialization
Generates the complete, ordered plan
upfront.
Invokes reactive Task Planner for the
immediate subtask (full sketch op-
tional).
Normal Execution
Executes the fixed plan sequentially
without deviation.
Re-queries the Task Planner at each
step; continuously adapts to observa-
tions.
Error Recovery
Triggers conditional re-planning via an
explicit replan action.
Inherently recovers by re-evaluating the
current state at the next step.
Table S13: Instruction robustness: Number of subtasks emitted by each planner for the three
semantically equivalent phrasings (v0, v1, v2) detailed in Table S14. The spread ∆= max −min
quantifies consistency across paraphrases. Both planners utilize the same GPT-5.4 backbone and
starting frame to isolate the evaluation to the planning decomposition. paraphrase-robust planner
yields a consistent subtask count (i.e., a near-zero ∆).
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
Task
v0
v1
v2
∆
v0
v1
v2
∆
push-radio
3
2
3
1
4
4
4
0
dispose-trash
6
12
3
9
12
12
12
0
stack-storage
4
2
2
2
10
9
10
1
fetch-beer
5
4
4
1
7
7
10
3
Mean ∆
3.25
1.00
This discrepancy is rooted in the architectural design. MobiAgent’s Task Planner selects each subtask
from a fixed catalogue of atomic skills. Thus, the granularity is constrained by the skill set rather
than the instruction’s surface form—rewording alters the vocabulary within a step, but not the overall
step count. RoboClaw’s free-form generation, however, produces verbose and inconsistent strings
that vary with the phrasing. If routed to a policy, these would be far out-of-distribution compared
to the short, canonical prompts used during training. By conditioning every expert on a short, fixed
skill string (e.g., pick up bottle of beer from fridge), MobiAgent ensures its plans remain
paraphrase-robust and its policy prompts strictly in-distribution.
29


Table S14: Instruction paraphrases utilized in the robustness evaluation. For each of the four
BEHAVIOR-1K tasks, the underlying goal remains fixed while the instruction is reworded into three
semantically equivalent variants (v0, v1, v2). Both planners receive the exact same prompt string for
a given variant.
Task
Variant
Instruction
push-radio
v0
Turn on the radio sitting on the coffee table in the living room.
v1
Switch on the radio that is on the living-room coffee table.
v2
Power up the radio resting on the coffee table in the living room.
dispose-trash
v0
There are three cans of soda in the living room. Pick up each can and
throw it into the trash can in the kitchen, one at a time, until all three cans
are in the kitchen trash can.
v1
Take the three soda cans from the living room and drop them, one by one,
into the kitchen trash can.
v2
Clear all three soda cans out of the living room by putting each one into
the kitchen bin, handling them one at a time.
stack-storage
v0
Move the two storage boxes from the living room to the garage. Place
the first box on the garage floor and stack the second box on top of it.
v1
Carry both storage boxes from the living room into the garage; set one
box down on the garage floor and put the other box on top of it.
v2
Relocate the two storage boxes out of the living room into the garage,
leaving the first on the floor and stacking the second over it.
fetch-beer
v0
Take two bottles of beer from the fridge to the coffee table, then close the
fridge door.
v1
Bring two beer bottles out of the fridge over to the coffee table, and
afterwards shut the fridge door.
v2
Move two bottles of beer from the refrigerator onto the coffee table, then
close the refrigerator.
30


Table S15: Verbatim emitted plans for the instruction-robustness study. This table presents every
subtask produced by each planner across the four BEHAVIOR-1K tasks and their three semantically
equivalent phrasings (v0, v1, v2) detailed in Table S14.
Variant
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
push-radio (task-0000)
v0
1. Move to the living room coffee table and po-
sition yourself within reach of the radio while
keeping a safe manipulation distance.
2. Visually align an arm and gripper with the
radio’s power button or power switch so the con-
trol can be pressed or toggled cleanly without
knocking the radio over.
3. Press or toggle the radio’s power control once
to turn the radio on, then release contact without
moving the radio significantly.
1. move to radio
2. pick up radio from coffee table
3. press radio
4. place radio on coffee table
v1
1. Find the radio on the living-room coffee table,
identify its power button or switch, and move
into a stable pre-press position with a clear ap-
proach to the control without activating it yet.
2. Use a careful precise motion to press or tog-
gle the radio’s power control on the living-room
coffee table and turn the radio on. Stop after the
control has been actuated once clearly.
1. move to radio
2. pick up radio from living-room coffee table
3. press radio
4. place radio on living-room coffee table
v2
1. Approach the radio on the coffee table in the
living room and position your gripper in front
of its power control with a stable, collision-free
pose ready to actuate it.
2. Actuate the radio’s power control on the cof-
fee table to turn the radio on. Press the power
button firmly once or rotate the power knob only
as much as needed to switch the device from off
to on, then release safely.
3. Hold position briefly, observe the radio after
actuation, and make any minimal corrective re-
press only if needed so the radio is left powered
on.
1. move to radio
2. pick up radio from coffee table
3. press radio
4. place radio on coffee table
dispose-trash (task-0001)
v0
1. In the living room, locate one soda can, ap-
proach it safely, and grasp it securely with a
stable hold for transport.
2. Carry the grasped soda can from the living
room to the kitchen trash can, position it over
the trash opening, and release it so the can lands
inside the trash can.
3. Return attention to the living room, locate
a second soda can that is not yet disposed, ap-
proach it safely, and grasp it securely with a
stable hold for transport.
4. Carry the second grasped soda can from the
living room to the kitchen trash can, position it
over the trash opening, and release it so the can
lands inside the trash can.
5. Locate the last remaining soda can in the
living room, approach it safely, and grasp it
securely for transport without disturbing the en-
vironment unnecessarily.
6. Carry the last grasped soda can to the kitchen
trash can, align over the trash opening, and re-
lease it so the can lands fully inside the trash
can.
1. move to trash can
2. pick up trash can from floor
3. move to can of soda
4. pick up can of soda from floor
5. place can of soda in trash can
6. move to can of soda
7. pick up can of soda from floor
8. place can of soda in trash can
9. move to can of soda
10. pick up can of soda from floor
11. place can of soda in trash can
12. place trash can on floor
31


(Table S15, continued)
Variant
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
v1
1. Navigate to the first soda can in the living
room and stop in a stable pose that allows grasp-
ing.
2. Pick up the first soda can from the living room
with a stable grasp and lift it clear of nearby sur-
faces.
3. Carry the soda can to the kitchen trash can
and align it above the trash opening without col-
liding with the bin or surroundings.
4. Release the soda can so it falls into the
kitchen trash can, then retract the gripper with-
out pulling the can back out.
5. Navigate back to the living room and stop in
a stable pose near the second remaining soda
can for grasping.
6. Pick up the second soda can from the liv-
ing room with a stable grasp and lift it clear of
nearby surfaces.
7. Carry the soda can to the kitchen trash can
and align it above the trash opening without col-
liding with the bin or surroundings.
8. Release the soda can so it falls into the
kitchen trash can, then retract the gripper with-
out pulling the can back out.
9. Navigate back to the living room and stop in
a stable pose near the third remaining soda can
for grasping.
10. Pick up the third soda can from the living
room with a stable grasp and lift it clear of
nearby surfaces.
11. Carry the soda can to the kitchen trash can
and align it above the trash opening without col-
liding with the bin or surroundings.
12. Release the soda can so it falls into the
kitchen trash can, then retract the gripper with-
out pulling the can back out.
1. move to trash can
2. pick up trash can from floor
3. move to soda can
4. pick up soda can from floor
5. place soda can in trash can
6. move to soda can
7. pick up soda can from floor
8. place soda can in trash can
9. move to soda can
10. pick up soda can from floor
11. place soda can in trash can
12. place trash can on floor
v2
1. Find one soda can in the living room, pick
it up securely, carry it to the kitchen bin, and
place it fully inside the bin.
2. Find the next remaining soda can in the living
room, pick it up securely, carry it to the kitchen
bin, and place it fully inside the bin without
disturbing cans already deposited.
3. Find the last remaining soda can in the living
room, pick it up securely, carry it to the kitchen
bin, and place it fully inside the bin, leaving no
soda cans remaining in the living room.
1. move to kitchen bin
2. pick up kitchen bin from floor
3. move to soda can
4. pick up soda can from floor
5. place soda can in kitchen bin
6. move to soda can
7. pick up soda can from floor
8. place soda can in kitchen bin
9. move to soda can
10. pick up soda can from floor
11. place soda can in kitchen bin
12. place kitchen bin on floor
32


(Table S15, continued)
Variant
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
stack-storage (task-0016)
v0
1. Identify one storage box in the living room,
reach to it, grasp it securely with both arms if
needed, and lift it into a stable carrying pose.
2. Carry the grasped storage box from the living
room to the garage and place it flat and stably on
the garage floor at a location suitable for stack-
ing a second box on top.
3. Return to the remaining storage box in the
living room, grasp it securely with both arms if
needed, and lift it into a stable carrying pose.
4. Carry the second storage box from the living
room to the garage, align it above the first box
already on the garage floor, and place it cen-
tered and stably on top of the first box before
releasing.
1. move to door
2. open door
3. move to storage box
4. pick up storage box from floor
5. move to floor
6. place storage box on floor
7. move to storage box
8. pick up storage box from floor
9. move to storage box
10. place storage box on storage box
v1
1. Pick up one storage box from the living room,
carry it into the garage, and place it stably on the
garage floor leaving enough free space above it
for stacking a second box.
2. Pick up the remaining storage box from the
living room, carry it into the garage, align it
above the box already on the garage floor, and
place it stably on top without tipping or sliding.
1. move to door
2. open door
3. move to storage box
4. pick up storage box from floor
5. move to storage box
6. pick up storage box from floor
7. move to floor
8. place storage box on floor
9. place storage box on storage box
v2
1. Pick up one storage box in the living room,
carry it into the garage, and place it flat and sta-
bly on the garage floor where it can serve as the
base for stacking a second box. Release only af-
ter the box is stable and not touching obstacles.
2. Pick up the remaining storage box in the liv-
ing room, carry it into the garage, align it over
the first box, and place it stably on top of that
box. Release only when the upper box is bal-
anced and fully supported by the lower box.
1. move to door
2. open door
3. move to storage box
4. pick up storage box from floor
5. move to floor
6. place storage box on floor
7. move to storage box
8. pick up storage box from floor
9. move to storage box
10. place storage box on storage box
fetch-beer (task-0017)
v0
1. Open the fridge door, grasp one bottle of beer
from inside the fridge, and take it out securely.
2. Place the beer bottle you are holding onto the
coffee table in a stable upright position.
3. Return to the open fridge, grasp a second
bottle of beer from inside the fridge, and take it
out securely.
4. Place the second beer bottle onto the coffee
table in a stable upright position near the first
bottle.
5. Close the fridge door fully without disturbing
the bottles on the coffee table.
1. move to fridge
2. open fridge
3. pick up bottle of beer from fridge
4. move to coffee table
5. place bottle of beer on coffee table
6. move to fridge
7. close fridge
v1
1. Open the fridge door wide enough to access
the beer bottles inside.
2. Take one beer bottle out of the open fridge
and place it upright on the coffee table.
3. Take a second beer bottle out of the open
fridge and place it upright on the coffee table
next to the first one.
4. Close the fridge door fully.
1. move to fridge
2. open fridge
3. pick up beer bottle from fridge
4. move to coffee table
5. place beer bottle on coffee table
6. move to fridge
7. close fridge
33


(Table S15, continued)
Variant
RoboClaw
MobiAgent (ours)
v2
1. Open the refrigerator door enough to access
the beer bottles inside.
2. Pick up one bottle of beer from inside the re-
frigerator, carry it carefully, and place it upright
on the coffee table.
3. Pick up a second bottle of beer from inside
the refrigerator, carry it carefully, and place it
upright on the coffee table next to the first bot-
tle.
4. Close the refrigerator door fully after remov-
ing the two beer bottles.
1. move to refrigerator
2. open refrigerator
3. pick up bottle of beer from refrigerator
4. move to coffee table
5. place bottle of beer on coffee table
6. pick up bottle of beer from refrigerator
7. move to coffee table
8. place bottle of beer on coffee table
9. move to refrigerator
10. close refrigerator
34
