Title: A Decade of Bayesian Optimization for Controller Tuning and Robot Learning: Tutorial, Review, and Future Prospects

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.09403v1

Published Time: Thu, 10 Sep 2026 00:22:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# A Decade of Bayesian Optimization for Controller Tuning and Robot Learning: Tutorial, Review, and Future Prospects 

David Stenger 1, Paul Brunzema 1, Johanna Menn 1, Alexander von Rohr 2

Angela P . Schoellig 3 and Sebastian Trimpe 1

> 1

RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 

> 2

University of Technology Nuremberg, Nuremberg, Germany 

> 3

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 

In the past decade, Bayesian optimization (BO) has emerged as a powerful and adaptable framework for automatic controller tuning and robot learning. This article offers a compre-hensive overview of the state-of-the-art in BO, designed to support both researchers and prac-titioners in understanding recent advancements, practical applications, and future research directions. We begin by adopting a practitioner’s perspective, illustrating how to effectively set up BO through a representative controller tuning example. We position BO within the broader context of learning paradigms, ranging from deep reinforcement learning to data-driven con-trol, and highlight scenarios where BO is most advantageous. Next, we discuss the diverse range of BO methods that have been developed to tackle complex problems and specific appli-cations. This article provides a unified perspective on the current landscape of BO, emphasizing its relevance to control systems and robotics, and it highlights future prospects by identifying key research challenges and promising avenues for advancing BO in the field. This includes ad-dressing a significant gap in the BO landscape: the lack of standardized benchmark problems specifically for control-related applications. To foster future research and ensure rigorous eval-uation, we start an effort towards a lightweight benchmark suite for control engineering and robotics. We also present metrics and best practices to facilitate direct comparisons between new BO algorithms and established state-of-the-art methods. 

## 1 Introduction 

Sequential experimental design, and specifically Bayesian optimization (BO), has emerged as an im-portant but often hidden method for efficient and automated experimentation in various scientific and industrial applications. For example, Google’s black-box optimization service, Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017), which employs BO, has optimized parameters for more than 70 million problems (Song et al., 2024), illustrating the substantial but mostly unseen practical impact of this method. In control and robotics, accurate parameter tuning is essential. Controllers ranging from classical PID structures to modern model predictive control (MPC) require careful tuning to achieve optimal performance. Traditionally, this tuning relies on domain expertise, trial-and-error experimentation, and heuristic methods, often consuming considerable time and resources. In the past decade, BO has become a widely recognized method for automating this tuning process, significantly reducing the need for manual intervention and offering a systematic approach to parameter optimization (see Fig. 1). Bayesian optimization distinguishes itself from other        

> Funding. This work has in part been supported by the Ger-man Research Foundation (DFG) within grant TR 1433 /4-1 and un-der Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC-2023 Internet of Production (390621612), by the Helmholtz School for Data Science in Life, Earth and Energy (HDS-LEE), and by the Robotics Institute Germany (RIG), funded through BMFTR grant 16ME0997K. 2007 2010 2013 2016 2019 2022 2025 Year of Publication 0246810 12 14 # Hardware Applications

Figure 1. Number of control and robotics papers that use BO for online parameter tuning on hardware according to the review method described in Sec. 7.1. Total number of reviewed papers: 110. 

optimization methods mainly due to its data efficiency, particularly valuable when experiments are costly in terms of computation, time, or hardware usage. Unlike classical controller tuning methods, BO makes minimal assumptions about the system, treating it as a black-box requiring only measurable performance outputs. In contrast to deep reinforcement learning, BO leverages 

> Corresponding author: David Stenger, david.stenger@dsme.rwth-aachen.de arXiv:2609.09403v1 [cs.RO] 8 Sep 2026 D. Stenger et al.

well established controller structures including their the-oretical properties and thus requires little environment interactions. BO balances exploration of new parameter regions with exploitation of promising areas, guided by probabilistic models and information-theoretic criteria. The versatility of the BO framework has led to the de-velopment of numerous methodological advancements addressing practical challenges specific to controller tun-ing and robotics. These advancements include methods for safe exploration to prevent hardware failures, han-dling constraints, multi-objective optimization scenarios, and adapting to changing environments. Despite the widespread use and capabilities of BO, the lack of standardized benchmark problems and systematic evaluations in the control and robotics communities re-mains a challenge. Recognizing this gap, this paper pro-vides an extensive survey of the current state-of-the-art and introduces evaluation guidelines and a step towards a lightweight benchmark suite for black-box controller tuning. These benchmarks enable fair and direct compar-isons, encouraging further innovation and rigorous test-ing of new BO methods in controller tuning and robotic applications. In this survey and tutorial, we provide guidance to both new and experienced practitioners in applying BO to controller tuning and robot learning. The paper starts with a practical tutorial illustrated by examples and progressively transitions to a comprehensive re-view of advanced BO methods and their applications. Finally, we highlight current research challenges and suggest promising directions for future work to further establish BO as a fundamental method for automated experimentation in control systems and robotics. 

1.1 Contributions 

This article provides a comprehensive survey and tuto-rial on the state-of-the-art use of BO, specifically tailored for controller tuning and robot learning. We systemat-ically cover both methods and practical considerations. Further, we provide benchmarking guidelines and out-line emerging directions, fostering future BO research in control and robotics. Our contributions are structured into three main parts: 

Part A: Practitioner-Oriented Tutorial. We present a structured, practical tutorial demonstrating how typi-cal controller tuning tasks can be formulated as black-box optimization problems and solved efficiently using BO. Through intuitive examples and accompanying code, readers can quickly understand core concepts and read-ily apply BO to their own control problems (Sec. 2 & 3). Additionally, we explicitly position BO relative to al-ternative learning paradigms, clarifying scenarios where BO offers advantages (Sec. 4). 

Part B: Comprehensive Review of Methodologies and Applications. We systematically review key design choices in BO, providing clear guidance on methodolog-ical best practices and their implementation (Sec. 5). Advanced BO variants that address common real-world controller tuning challenges such as constraints, mul-tiple objectives, crash constraints, and time-varying conditions are critically evaluated and contextualized within control applications (Sec. 6). Furthermore, our extensive review of the literature covers 110 empirical hardware studies, synthesizing practical evidence and highlighting the real-world effectiveness and versatility of BO approaches (Sec. 7). 

Part C: Benchmarking Guidelines and Example. 

Recognizing a critical gap in standardized evaluation, we provide best practices (Sec. 8) in benchmarking black-box optimization algorithms regarding base-lines, metrics and statistical analysis. Additionally, we provide TU N E CO N T R O L (§): a step towards a lightweight benchmark suite for black-box controller tuning. TuneControl is easily extensible, and we invite the community to contribute additional tuning tasks. We illustrate those best practices providing an example with code (Sec. 9). To conclude, we summarize directions for future re-search and open issues in Sec. 10. Compared to pre-vious surveys, ours explicitly integrates theoretical clar-ity with actionable insights, advanced BO methodologies, and the development of dedicated benchmarks, uniquely tailored to the needs of the control and robotics commu-nities. 

1.2 A Brief History of BO for Controller Tuning and Robot Learning 

The foundations of BO have evolved significantly over the past decades. The earliest roots of modern BO trace back at least to 1964, when Kushner (1964) in-troduced probabilistic improvement methods based on Wiener processes. A decade later, the widely-used expected improvement acquisition function was pro-posed by Moˇ ckus (1974), while Gaussian process (GP) priors for BO emerged prominently by the late 1970s (e.g., (O ¯ OHagan, 1978)). BO saw a significant increase in popularity following the seminal contributions of the design and analysis of computer experiments (DACE) framework by Sacks et al. (1989) and efficient global optimization (EGO) introduced by Jones et al. (1998). A comprehensive early survey summarizing Kriging-based methods was provided by Jones (2001). Readers inter-ested in a detailed historical perspective are referred to (Garnett, 2022). The adoption of BO in control systems and robotics took additional time. The earliest hardware application of BO in these domains was in 2007, with Lizotte et al. (2007) optimizing robot gait parameters and demonstrat-ing clear advantages over classical hill-climbing methods. Following this breakthrough, BO received continued at-tention for gait optimization tasks (e.g., (Hemker et al., 2009; Tesch et al., 2011, 2013)). A notable early tutorial, which among other topics addressed hierarchical rein-forcement learning through BO, was provided by Brochu et al. (2010). In 2013, BO researchers began exploring beyond traditional single-objective optimization, particularly by introducing multi-objective BO methods applied to 

> Page 2 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

robotic gait optimization (Tesch et al., 2013). A few years later, BO entered classical continuous control applications, first demonstrated with linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) tuning by Marco et al. (2016) and proportional-integral (PI) parameter optimization by Berkenkamp et al. (2016). The latter study notably introduced the influential paradigm of safe BO to the control and robotics community. Since these early demonstrations, BO’s popularity for controller tuning and robot learning has grown substan-tially, making it today an established and widely adopted method within control systems and robotics research. 

1.3 Related Reviews and Tutorials 

In addition to the recent book summarizing BO by Gar-nett (Garnett, 2022), numerous reviews and tutorials have been published on BO. Most existing surveys (As-tudillo and Frazier, 2021; Bai et al., 2023; Candelieri, 2021; Frazier, 2018; Greenhill et al., 2020; Shahriari et al., 2016; Wang and Dowling, 2022; Wang et al., 2023) have a broad view and are not focused on control systems or robotics. Consequently, these reviews neither systematically cover control-specific applications nor dis-cuss the particular challenges encountered in real-world control systems. Within the robotics and control domains specifically, comprehensive overviews remain scarce. After the early tutorial by Brochu et al. (2010), a recent tutorial by Paulson et al. (2023) reviewed derivative-free policy learning with a particular emphasis on interpretable controller structures. In contrast, our paper explicitly targets a broader range of BO methodologies essen-tial for robotics and control. Specifically, we clearly distinguish among advanced BO variants including con-strained BO, safe BO, crash constraints, multi-objective BO, contextual, and time-varying BO each highly rele-vant but typically overlooked or conflated in previous reviews. Additionally, we provide benchmarking best practices to systematically evaluate and compare BO algorithms, addressing a significant practical gap that has not previously been covered. 

## PA RT A: T U T O R I A L 

Part A primarily addresses practitioners and researchers new to BO and explains when and how to use BO for con-troller tuning and robot learning. For that purpose, Sec. 2 formulates the controller tuning problem as a black-box optimization problem using an illustrative example. Af-terwards, Sec. 3 introduces controller tuning with BO us-ing the same illustrative example. Sec. 2 and 3 consider the easiest form of BO: single objective BO with known feasible domain (“vanilla BO”). More advanced problem formulations are introduced in Sec. 6 of Part B. Finally, Sec. 4 distinguishes BO from other learning paradigms in control and provides recommendations on when to use BO. 

## 2 Controller Tuning as Black-Box Optimization 

Sec. 2.1 introduces the core idea of controller tuning as a black-box optimization problem. The goal of this sec-tion is to introduce the mathematical notation and es-tablish the black-box approach as a general tool to ad-just closed-loop behaviors of arbitrary control systems us-ing experimental data. Figure 2 summarizes the general idea. Sec. 2.2 gives an overview on how to extend this problem to more practical use cases and shows how to include prior knowledge. 

Key Messages 

The tuning objective is defined by some metric on the input /output trajectory allowing the optimiza-tion of arbitrary and unknown closed-loop systems (Sec. 2.1). The single-objective unconstrained prob-lem formulation can be extended to more practical problem formulations and the Bayesian nature of BO allows for introducing prior knowledge in many ways (Sec. 2.2). 

2.1 Single-Objective Unconstrained Problem Formulation 

To make controller tuning amenable to black-box opti-mization, we define the tuning task in terms of an objec-tive function of a closed-loop trajectory. Crucially, all we assume about the control-loop is that we can measure its performance, and that this performance is influenced by a set of adjustable parameters. This generality allows controller tuning with BO for many relevant scenarios. For instance, we do not need to assume that the system is Markovian or that the controller is stateless or differ-entiable. We can also tune multiple controllers and ob-servers at the same time, for example, when there are hierarchical control loops operating at different frequen-cies. In fact, we do not even need to know what the control law is as long as we can choose some of its pa-rameters and observe its effects in the closed-loop. This also allows tuning of proprietary controllers. We may even retain the theoretical guarantees of the optimized controllers. The wide applicability of BO allows for great generality in its formalization. In the following we formalize the problem in a notation familiar for control engineers, but deviate slightly when another notation is helpful in the context of this tutorial. We start with a discrete-time dynamical system 

x t+1 = fs(x t , u t , w t ),

y t = gs(x t , u t ), (1) where x t ∈ X is the state of the system, y t ∈ Y its mea-sured output, u t ∈ U its input, w t ∈ W a disturbance, and x 0 is the (possibly random) initial state at time step 

t ∈ N. Here, X, U, and W denote the state, input, and disturbance space, respectively. The system operates in closed loop with a controller π determining the next in-

> Page 3 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

Bayesian Optimization Closed-Loop Black-Box Experiment   

> Observed cost New parameters Best parameters Optimized controller
> Update dataset Fit surrogate model
> e.g., Gaussian process collect data of the experiment disturbances influencing the system e.g., through hardware interface increment index
> Optimize acquisition function Calculate cost Set parameters
> e.g., information-theoretic, optimisitic
> Perform experiment (e.g., reference tracking)
> Controller
> Dynamical system
> choose accordingly

Figure 2. Controller tuning with BO: The controller tuning task can be formulated as a black-box optimization problem (Sec. 2) in which the controller parameters are optimized with BO (Sec. 3). 

put u t = π(y0: t ; θ ) based on past measured outputs, where θ ∈ Θ are the parameters of the controller to be tuned and Θ is the set of possible parameters, the search domain. This formulation includes the special cases of acting on the last output measurement π(y t ; θ ), state feedback π(y t ; θ ) with y t = x t , and stateful controllers. The parameters θ may represent the gains of a PID, poles of controller and observer, parameters of an LQR cost, and any other controller parameter (see Sec. 7.3). In practice, control engineering expertise is often used to define a suitable parameterization and search domain. The tuning task is defined in terms of input /output tra-jectories generated by the closed-loop system, denoted as 

τθ = ( y0: N , u0: N )θ ,x 0 , (2) where N is the length of an episode. This implies that we do not need to know fs, gs, x 0 or the state trajectory. We write τθ to denote that the trajectory depends on the parameterization of the controller. The trajectory might be a random variable if initial state, disturbances, output measurement, or the controller are stochastic. The func-tion l(τθ ) takes a trajectory as input and calculates a cost metric. Because the trajectory depends on the controller parameters θ , we can formulate the objective directly as an unknown function J(θ ) of the parameters: 

J(θ ) = l(τθ ), (3) The tuning problem is to find optimal parameters θ ∗ that minimize the objective function: 

θ ∗ = argmin θ ∈Θ E [J(θ )] . (4) As a notational shorthand, we define ¯ J(θ ) := E [J(θ )] 

as the expected cost. To approximately solve (4), we assume that we can perform a closed-loop experiment for arbitrary controller parametrization θ ∈ Θ. The result of experiment k with parameters θ k is a noisy observation of the tuning objec-tive Jk = ¯J(θ k) + εk, where εk is a random realization of, e.g., random disturbances or initial state. Given a trajec-tory we need the expression l(·) to calculate Jk = l(τθ k )

but we may not be able to compute J(θ ) directly if, for example, the system is partially unknown. The resulting data set after M evaluations used to inform the tuning process is D = {(θ k, Jk)}Mk=1. Further, we assume that experiments are costly for example in terms of time. Consequently, we cast the tuning problem in (4) as a black-box optimization problem: We approximately solve (4) by sequentially performing closed-loop ex-periments. Performance evaluations of the closed-loop system are treated as noisy, zeroth-order oracle and BO is the algorithm of choice to discover suitable controllers in a data efficient manner, i.e., with as few experiments as possible. 

Illustrative cart-pole example (Fig. 3) open in §

We consider of the well-known cart-pole as an illus-trative example system (cf. Fig.3). We deliberately do not report the system dynamics equations because they are irrelevant to setting up the black-box opti-mization problem. Informally, our task can be formu-lated as: 

Stabilize the pendulum in the upright position while having the cart accurately track reference position jumps using a simple controller. 

Below, we describe Steps 1. to 3. in Fig. 3, which are necessary to formalize this problem as a black-box optimization problem, as illustrated in this section. 

1. Define policy structure. We know from clas-sical control engineering that a state feedback con-troller uk = −K x k can be used for this task. Our con-troller has 4 degrees of freedom K = k1, k2, k3, k4

.For illustration purposes, we choose to only optimize one parameter θ = k4.

2. Define experiment / episode. The episode should be chosen in a way that closely resembles what we want to achieve with our system. Here, we choose our reference trajectory wx1 (t) for the cart po-sition to consist of reference jumps at three time steps.               

> Page 4 of 37 D. Stenger et al. −12 −10 −8−6−4−20
> θ
> 8.08.28.48.68.89.0Cost  J(θ )
> Unstable region Samples of function J(θ)
> Optimization bounds 0510 15 20 25 30 Time [s]
> −4
> −2024States Position Angle Reference Suboptimal Optimal

Define experiment / episode Define cost function and domain Control system 2. 3. Optimize controller parameter 4. Use optimized controller 5. 

Define policy structure 1. 

Practical requirements            

> Controller Dynamical system Controller Dynamical system 8.48.68.89.0Cost  J(θ )
> Initial
> −10 −50
> θ
> 0.00 0.02 Acq. function  α(·)
> BO Step 2
> −10 −50
> θ
> BO Step 5
> −10 −50
> θ
> BO Step 10 Optimization bounds Pred. optimum Next query Observations
> −10 −50
> θ

Figure 3. An example of BO for a cart pole system in 5 steps. Steps 1. to 3. cover the problem formulation (Sec. 2) and Step 4. 

the optimization (Sec. 3). After optimization, the controller is operated with optimal parameters θ ∗ in Step 5. .

The total episode takes 30 seconds and is depicted in Fig. 3. 

3. Define a cost function and domain. We use a weighted version of the mean absolute error cost metric: l(τθ ) = 1

> N

PNk=1 |q⊤ x k| + |Ru k| where q =[10, 10, 10, 10 ]⊤ and R = 1. We bound the optimiza-tion domain to −10 ≤ θ ≤ − 2. As stated before, 

l(τθ ) is a design choice and should be task-specific. 

. . . example continues in Sec. 3.2. . . 

2.2 Real World Optimization Problems 

Sec. 2.1 considered the simplest problem formulation for controller tuning with BO: Single-objective uncon-strained optimization without any prior knowledge. The BO framework offers many possibilities to extend this problem formulation to more advanced settings such as multiple objectives, constrained optimization, adaptive optimization or safe optimization. We discuss those extended formulations and methods to address them in Sec. 6. Additionally, in control and robotics applications we often have prior knowledge about our system which we may want to use during the optimization process. This may either help to speed up optimization or make the optimization safer. BO offers many design choices and parameters that can be used to include different types of prior information. They are described in detail in the following sections. Fast-to-evaluate low-fidelity models of the system can be included in the probabilistic model of BO (see Sec. 5.1). Slow-to-evaluate black-box models can be used in a multi-fidelity setting (see Sec. 6.10). Subjective user beliefs can be leveraged through coactive optimization (see Sec. 6.5) or in the criterion to select new sample points (see Sec. 5.2). Properties derived from analytical system models such as robust stability margins can be included via constraints (see Sec. 6.1) and any type of model can be used to select a starting parametrization for BO (see Sec. 7.5) and potentially combined with local (see Sec. 6.9) or safe (see Sec. 6.2) optimization. We also refer to BO reviews that specifi-cally consider transfer learning in BO (Bai et al., 2023) and Gray-box BO (Astudillo and Frazier, 2021), however not from a control and robotics perspective. 

## 3 Introduction to Bayesian Optimization and Gaussian Process Regression 

This section introduces the main concepts of BO with Gaussian process regression (GPR). We refer to Exploring Bayesian Optimization by Agnihotri and Batra (2020) as an intuitive introductory resource. Sec. 3.1 introduces GPs as the most frequently used surrogate model in BO. Sec. 3.2 introduces single-objective BO without any ex-tensions. The most important degrees of freedom in BO for controller tuning and of the GP model are reviewed and discussed in detail in Sec. 5. Based on these discus-sions we give recommendations for the main degrees of freedom in Sec. 5. For BO in more complex settings, we refer to Sec. 6. 

Key Messages 

Gaussian process regression is primarily used as a probabilistic non-parameteric surrogate model for the analytically unknown tuning objective (Sec. 3.1). An acquisition function selects promising candidate parameters based on the GPR model. Those parame-ters are then evaluated and the GPR model is updated (Sec. 3.2). 

> Page 5 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

3.1 Gaussian Process Regression 

Most work on BO for controller tuning uses GPR as a probabilistic, non-parametric surrogate for the unknown scalar objective J(θ ). Here we briefly summarize the GP model used throughout. For a comprehensive treatment, see (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). 

Observation model. In the noisy setting, we assume that an observation Ji at parameter setting θ i is a cor-rupted measurement of an underlying latent function value ¯ J(θ i ),

Ji = ¯J(θ i ) + εi , (5) where the observation noise is commonly modeled as i.i.d. Gaussian, εi ∼ N 0, σn2, yielding a homoscedas-tic Gaussian likelihood. 

GP prior. We place a GP prior on the latent objective function, ¯J ∼ GP (m, k) , (6) with mean function m : Θ → R and covariance (kernel) function k : Θ × Θ → R. Equivalently, for any finite set of inputs, the corresponding latent function values are jointly Gaussian distributed. In BO, this prior en-codes structural assumptions about ¯ J: m specifies the prior expected objective value, and k(θ i , θ j ) specifies the prior covariance between ¯ J(θ i ) and ¯ J(θ j ). For typical stationary kernels, k(θ i , θ j ) decreases with the distance between θ i and θ j , expressing the assumption that sim-ilar parameters yield similar objective values. 

Posterior predictive distribution. Given a dataset 

Dk = {(θ 1, J1), . . . , (θ k, Jk)}, (7) we denote the GP posterior conditioned on Dk by GP k.Conditioning yields a Gaussian posterior predictive distri-bution at any query location θ for both the latent objec-tive ¯ J(θ | Dk) and a future noisy observation J(θ | Dk),¯J(θ | Dk) ∼ N μk(θ ), σ2 

> k

(θ ) ,

J(θ | Dk) ∼ N μk(θ ), σ2 

> k

(θ ) + σn2 . (8) Computing the predictive mean μk(θ ) and variance 

σ2 

> k

(θ ) requires solving a linear system involving the 

k × k kernel matrix; direct methods scale cubically in k.

Hyperparameters. The prior GP is specified by a choice of mean and kernel family and the noise variance. In practice, these components depend on hyperparame-ters λGPR (e.g., kernel lengthscales, signal variance, and 

σn2), which are typically estimated from data. Given inputs Θk and observations J k, a standard approach is to maximize the (log) marginal likelihood P (J k | Θk, λGPR ),i.e., maximum likelihood estimation, where P denotes probability. Because BO often operates with few ob-servations, especially early on, maximum likelihood estimates can be poor. A common remedy is to place a hyperprior P (λGPR ) and maximize the posterior, yielding a maximum a-posteriori estimate of λGPR proportional to P (J k | Θk, λGPR ) P(λGPR ). (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) 

3.2 Bayesian Optimization 

BO is a sample-efficient stochastic black-box optimiza-tion method that approximates a function’s global optimum without knowing the function’s analytical form or gradients. It is effective for non-convex functions and noisy, expensive objective function evaluations. It is a well-known optimization algorithm that has been applied to a wide variety of problems in engineering, such as structural design, drug design /discovery, phar-maceutical product development, and new material design (Candelieri, 2021; Garnett, 2022). The reader is referred to (Shahriari et al., 2016) and (Garnett, 2022) for a more extensive introduction to BO. 

Algorithm 1 Single-Objective Unconstrained BO  

> 1:

Input : initial parameters θ 1, . . . , θ kinit  

> 2:

J1, ..., Jkinit ← run kinit expensive-to-evaluate episodes with θ 1, . . . , θ kinit  

> 3:

Dkinit ← { (θ 1, J1), ..., (θ kinit , Jkinit )} 

> 4:

k ← kinit  

> 5:

repeat  

> 6:

GP k ← Fit GP model of J(θ ) using Dk with hy-perparameter optimization  

> 7:

θ k+1 = argmax Θ α(GP k) 

> 8:

(Jk+1) ← run episode with θ k+1 

> 9:

Dk+1 ← Dk ∪ { (θ k+1, Jk+1)} 

> 10:

k ← k + 1 

> 11:

until stopping criterion is met, e.g., k + 1 ≥ kmax  

> 12:

return approximated optimum ˆθ ∗

Algorithm 1 presents BO for a single-objective un-constrained optimization problem. First, during initial sampling, an initial data set Dkinit is created (Step 2) by evaluating multiple initial controller parameterizations 

θ 1, . . . , θ kinit , where kinit ≥ 1. The controller parame-ters are evaluated by running the expensive-to-evaluate closed-loop episode once for each parameterization to obtain noisy samples J1, . . . , Jkinit .After the initial sampling, the main optimization loop is entered (Steps 5-11). In each iteration k, a probabilis-tic surrogate model, in this case, a GP regression model (see Sec. 3.1), is fitted to all past evaluations Dk to ap-proximate the unknown objective function J(θ ) (Step 6). In Step 7, the GP model is used to determine the pa-rameterization to be evaluated next θ k+1. For this pur-pose, a so-called acquisition function α(θ ) is defined. It estimates the utility of evaluating the objective function at a certain point in the parameter space. The parame-terization, expected to contribute most to the progress of the optimization, is determined by maximizing the ac-quisition function. The acquisition function’s main task is to balance exploration (sampling where little is known about the objective function) and exploitation (sampling where good performance is expected) using probabilistic GP predictions. One of the simplest acquisition functions is called upper confidence bound (UCB) (for minimiza-tion lower confidence bound (LCB)) where the parame-

> Page 6 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

ter β balances between exploration and exploitation: 

θ k+1 = argmax θ ∈Θ αLCB (θ ),

αLCB (θ ) = − (μk (θ ) − βσ k (θ )) (9) The LCB acquisition function is large in areas where the cost function is expected to be small, i.e., small 

μk (θ ), and /or the uncertainty is large, i.e., large σk (θ ).In Sec. 5.2, we recommend using a more complex acqui-sition function without impactful hyperparameters such as β in GP-UCB. Parameters θ k+1 are then evaluated to obtain the corresponding noisy objective function value 

Jk+1 (Step 8). Afterward, the data set is augmented with the newly obtained information (Step 9) and the next iteration starts. After the maximum budget is reached or another stopping criterion is met, we estimate the best parameter value from the final GP model (Steps 11 and 12). 

Illustrative cart-pole example (Fig. 3) open in §

. . . continuation of the example from Sec. 2 . . . 

4. Optimize Control Parameters. Figure 3 shows how BO is applied to the one-dimensional cart-pole tuning problem defined in Sec. 2. We follow the BO design choices outlined in Sec. 5: zero mean, Gaussian likelihood, Matern 5 /2 ker-nel, maximum a-posteriori optimization for hyperpa-rameter optimization, and max-value entropy search (MES). Please refer to Sec. 5 on alternative BO design choices. After three initial random samples, the GP model predicts a lower cost function value near the lower bound of the domain. The uncertainty is also high in this region, as it has not yet been sampled. Conse-quently, the MES acquisition function identifies this area as the most beneficial for exploration. In BO Step 2, a new sample at θ = −10 is added to the dataset, updating the GP model. The following step focuses on exploitation, sampling near the current best ob-servation. After another exploitation step, BO Step 5 

demonstrates how, guided by MES, BO can escape a local predicted optimum and explore the region around θ = 4. By BO Step 10 , the GP model predicts the optimum accurately, and the objective function is well estimated near the optimum, despite substantial noise in the samples. 

5. Deployment. The predicted optimal parameters ˆθ ∗

can now be applied to the system. 

## 4 Distinction from Other Controller Learning Paradigms: When to use BO? 

Learning in control and robotics is a growing field that has produced many different methods for a wide variety of learning problems. In this section, we differentiate BO from other learning paradigms and highlight in which use cases BO is most useful. Specifically, we discuss alter-native black-box optimization algorithms (Sec. 4.1), rein-forcement learning (Sec. 4.2), and other learning-based control approaches (Sec. 4.3). For a detailed survey on data-efficient policy search in robotics we refer the reader to (Chatzilygeroudis et al., 2020a). 

Key Messages 

BO should be used instead of other black-box op-timizers when the objective is expensive to evalu-ate and noisy (Sec. 4.1). BO should be preferred over deep reinforcement learning when limited sys-tem interactions are available and policies from clas-sical control are sufficiently expressive. Furthermore, BO is applicable to non-Markovian systems and poli-cies, can handle sparse rewards, and has less impact-ful hyperparameters (Sec. 4.2). BO can be used in combination with classical and learning-based con-trol methods by optimizing their (hyper)parameters (Sec. 4.3). 

4.1 Alternative Black-Box Optimization Algorithms 

The problem formulated in Sec. 2 can be addressed using other black-box optimization algorithms. Examples in-clude the well-known particle swarm optimization (PSO) or covariance matrix-adaptive evolutionary search (CMA-ES). (Artale et al., 2017; Chao and Weixing, 2006; Hen-dra et al., 2016; Panda and Padhy, 2008; Singh Mahesh et al., 2016). It was shown on synthetic benchmarks (e.g., (Le Riche and Picheny, 2021)), in machine learning (e.g., (Turner et al., 2021)), and control and robotics, e.g., (Calan-dra et al., 2016; Stenger and Abel, 2022b) that BO is more sample-efficient than other black-box optimizers. However, alternative surrogate-based optimization algo-rithms such as global optimization via inverse distance (GLIS) weighting can reach competitive performance to BO (Bemporad, 2020). Similarly, set membership global optimization (SMGO) achieved similar sample-efficiency as BO according to Catenaro et al. (2025); Sabug Jr et al. (2021). Other key advantages of BO over competing black-box optimizers are its ability to facilitate noisy objective function evaluations and the many extensions that have been proposed for more complex problem formulations (Sec. 6) rendering it a practical framework for real-world problems. BO comes with a substantial amount of computational overhead because, at each iteration, a GP model is fit-ted to the data, and the acquisition function needs to be optimized. Therefore, BO is primarily applicable in cases where objective function evaluations are expensive 

in terms of time or other resources. Some research has been conducted in combining BO with other black-box optimizers (Duivenvoorden et al., 2017; Pitra et al., 2016). For example, the combination of BO and pattern search has shown great results in tun-ing for control (Stenger and Abel, 2022b) and offers pos-sibilities for future research. 

> Page 7 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

4.2 Reinforcement Learning 

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a learning paradigm in which an agent learns to make sequential decisions by interacting with an environment and receiving reward feedback. In its most general form, RL seeks to opti-mize a policy that maximizes cumulative reward over time. Two of the core challenges that make general RL difficult are (i) the typically high dimensionality of the policy parameter space and (ii) the sequential nature of the decision-making problem, where current actions in-fluence future states and rewards. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) addresses ex-pressive policy representation by parameterizing poli-cies as neural networks with thousands or millions of parameters (Murphy, 2024). This expressiveness en-ables exceptional asymptotic closed-loop performance on complex control tasks, often surpassing classical control approaches, e.g., in vision-based robotic ma-nipulation (Kalashnikov et al., 2018). However, the high-dimensional parameter space, combined with the inherent difficulty of sequential decision making, makes model-free DRL notoriously data-hungry, typically re-quiring millions of environment interactions for training. Moreover, training success heavily depends on carefully engineered, application-dependent hyperparameters and reward shaping (Hwangbo et al., 2019). Optimizing controller parameters with BO (cf. (4)) can be understood as a special case of RL; specifically, episodic, model-free policy search (Deisenroth, 2011). What fundamentally distinguishes BO-based controller tuning from general RL is the deliberate exploitation of prior control engineering knowledge. This prior knowl-edge manifests in two ways that directly address the two core challenges above: 1) A low-dimensional and structured parameter space. BO leverages well-established controller structures such as PID, LQR, or MPC that are known from control the-ory to be effective for specific classes of tasks. These structures encode substantial domain knowledge into their architecture, so that only a small number of free parameters remain to be tuned. This drastically re-duces the search space from thousands or millions of neural network weights to typically fewer than ten interpretable parameters. 2) Transforming a dynamic problem into a static optimiza-tion problem. The use of established controller struc-tures abstracts away the sequential decision-making aspect of the problem entirely. Because the controller structure already handles the system dynamics the re-maining task is to find the best static parameter set-ting. The dynamics are, in a sense, absorbed by the controller, and the optimization reduces to evaluat-ing an episode-level cost function J(θ ) as a function of the controller parameters. This is in stark contrast to general RL, where the policy must simultaneously learn to cope with the system dynamics and optimize long-term performance. Combining structured policies with the data-efficiency of BO enables effective learning with limited interac-tion time, placing BO-based controller tuning within the micro-data regime of RL (Chatzilygeroudis et al., 2020b), where only tens of experiments may suffice instead of millions. However, this efficiency comes at the cost of reduced asymptotic flexibility, as performance is inherently bounded by the expressiveness of the cho-sen controller structure. Moreover, designing suitable controller structures often requires substantial domain expertise and engineering effort. The black-box nature of BO naturally accommodates non-Markovian objectives, policies, and system dynam-ics, whereas standard RL formulations typically rely on Markovian assumptions. BO can also handle sparse re-wards and objectives defined over entire episodes with-out requiring modifications to the underlying algorithm. Finally, the two paradigms are not mutually exclusive: BO can be used to optimize hyperparameters of RL algo-rithms (Che et al., 2026), an approach commonly called AutoRL (Parker-Holder et al., 2022). 

4.3 Learning-Based Control 

We adopt the broad definition of learning-based control (LBC) as any method that uses machine learning in the de-sign or operation of a control system . Under this definition, BO for controller tuning is itself a form of learning-based control: BO has been developed largely in the machine learning community and builds on probabilistic machine learning techniques, most notably GPR. A variety of other LBC methods have gained signifi-cant popularity in recent years. Reinforcement learning (discussed in Sec. 4.2) learns control policies from inter-action data. Learning-based model predictive control, in its many flavors (e.g., (Coulson et al., 2019; Hewing et al., 2020)), combines data-driven models or data-driven predictions with receding-horizon optimization. Model-based policy search methods (e.g., (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011; Deisenroth et al., 2013)) first learn a dynamical model from data, which then serves as the basis for obtaining controller parameters. While model-based methods can be beneficial in terms of data efficiency, they strongly rely on the learned model ac-curately capturing the true dynamics, which is itself a challenging problem (Doerr et al., 2017). The use of data and learning in control is, however, not new and has deep roots in classical control theory. Adap-tive control methods seek to adjust model or controller parameters online in response to data (Annaswamy and Fradkov, 2021). Iterative learning control (ILC) improves performance over repeated task executions (Bristow et al., 2006). Data-driven control methods such as virtual reference feedback tuning (VRFT) (Campi et al., 2002) directly compute controller parameters from experimental data. What distinguishes BO within the broader LBC land-scape is its particular combination of characteristics: it treats the closed-loop system as a black box, leverages controller structure to reduce the problem to optimizing on the order of tens of parameters, and is specifically de-

> Page 8 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

signed for settings where each evaluation is expensive, for example, a hardware experiment or a high-fidelity simulation. Crucially, most LBC methods involve parameters or hyperparameters that must themselves be tuned. For example, learning-based MPC requires the specification of weighting matrices, prediction horizons, terminal costs, and regularization parameters. DRL depends on learning rates, network architectures, and reward shap-ing. Even adaptive control schemes have adaptation gains and design parameters. This makes BO an orthog-onal and complementary tool that can be applied on top of other LBC methods to tune their hyperparameters. Indeed, BO is already widely used for hyperparameter tuning in machine learning more broadly (Snoek et al., 2012; Turner et al., 2021). In the control domain, suc-cessful examples of BO tuning learning-based controllers include learning-based MPC (Fröhlich et al., 2021), ap-proximate MPC (Hose et al., 2025a), and extremum seeking controllers (Chakrabarty et al., 2022a). BO thus provides an orthogonal meta-optimization layer for tuning LBC methods. 

## PA RT B: R E V I E W 

Part B addresses advanced users of BO and researchers developing BO-algorithms for control and robotics. First, we review design choices in unconstrained single-objective BO (“vanilla BO”) and give recommendations on starting points for BO hyperparameters (Sec. 5). Building on this, we review advanced challenges that occur in controller and robotics tuning, formally define the respective optimization problems and explain how BO can solve them (Sec. 6). Lastly, we systematically survey a total of 110 papers that apply BO to robotics and control on hardware (Sec. 7). 

## 5 Design Choices in Vanilla Bayesian Optimization 

Building on Sec. 3, this section reviews the main design choices for single-objective BO and offers recommenda-tions for practitioners. These recommendations draw on both prior work and the authors’ experiences. However, a systematic evaluation on representative control- and robotics-specific benchmarks is currently still lacking in the literature (see Sec. 10), so these recommendations should be interpreted as an informed starting point rather than definitive conclusions. The two key components of BO are a probabilistic model of the objective function and an acquisition func-tion that, based on this model, will decide the next query location. In the following, we will first review the key aspects of the model (Sec. 5.1), mainly focusing on GPs, and then discuss different acquisition functions (Sec. 5.2). For quantitative analysis of the most popular design choices, we examined 110 papers that applied BO directly on hardware according to the criteria discussed in Sec. 7.1. Results are summarized in Fig. 4. 

Key Messages 

As a starting point, we recommend the following de-sign choices in BO: A GPR model with homoscedas-tic Gaussian likelihood, a Matérn or SE-kernel with ARD, zero or constant mean with standardized obser-vations, maximum a-posteriori hyperparameter opti-mization (Sec. 5.1), and max-value entropy search for particularly noisy objectives and logEI for high-dimensional and low-noise settings (Sec. 5.2). Fur-thermore, we recommend d plus a few, e.g., d + 4, initial data points, scale input and output data, and select the final solution by minimizing the expected cost over all evaluated parameterizations (Sec. 5.3). 

5.1 Probabilistic Surrogate Model 

Model Class. BO has its name from relying on a prob-abilistic surrogate model. At each iteration, the model is updated with an additional observation and used to predict the unknown objective function, see (8). Exam-ples of popular BO surrogate models are GPs (e.g., (Ba-landat et al., 2020)) (also known as Kriging), random forest (e.g., (Lindauer et al., 2022)), and tree-structured parzen estimators (TPE) (e.g., (Watanabe, 2023)). With few exceptions, the vast majority of papers for controller tuning use GPs as surrogate models. In fact from the 110 reviewed hardware applications (see Sec. 7.1) only Bellegarda et al. (2024) used TPEs instead of GPs. Fur-thermore, most of the extensions in Sec. 6 are based on GPs. This popularity of GPs as surrogate models may be explained by the analytical posterior computations (Ras-mussen and Williams, 2006) and appealing theoretical properties of GPs in the context of BO (Srinivas et al., 2010). Additionally, popular BO implementations like, BoTorch (Balandat et al., 2020), mainly rely on GPs as surrogate models. GPs work best for real-valued input spaces and small data sets as the computational complexity of inference scales cubically with the data set size (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). Many works have been proposed to ad-dress non-real-valued input spaces (Sec. 6.8) and to en-able scalable GP regression (Liu et al., 2020). Still, ran-dom forests and TPEs can handle categorical and integer variables out of the box (Bliek et al., 2023). Furthermore, they scale better with larger problem dimensions (Bliek et al., 2023). Empirically, they perform competitive to GP-based BO depending on the problem setting (Bliek et al., 2023) although exhaustive benchmarks on control and robotics problems are lacking. Furthermore, in re-cent years, using Bayesian neural networks for BO has shown promising results on tasks with complex input cor-relations (Brunzema et al., 2025a; Kristiadi et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). The ability to learn input correlations could also prove beneficial in controller tuning; however, apart from a few exceptions (Chakrabarty, 2022), this direction has remained largely unexplored. In what fol-lows, we concentrate on GPs as surrogates, though practi-            

> Page 9 of 37 D. Stenger et al. MLE MAP Fixed Other Model Selection 010 20 30 # Hardware Applications SE Matern RQ Other Kernel 010 20 30 EI ES PI UCB Other Acquisition Function 010 20 30 40 020 40 60 Problem Dimensionality 0510 15 20 25

Figure 4. Statistics on the model selection method, kernel (see Sec. 5.1), acquisition function (see Sec. 5.2) and problem dimensionality of control and robotics paper that use BO for online parameter tuning on hardware. Papers are selected according to the review method described in Sec. 7.1. Total number of papers: 110. Papers where the respective information is missing are excluded in this illustration. 

tioners should keep in mind that competitive alternatives exist. 

Recommended starting point: GPR. It is the most established method in control and robotics and has been extended to many advanced settings (see Sec. 6). 

Likelihood / Observation Model. The likelihood model encodes assumptions on the noise distribution of the black-box function (see (5)). The most popular observation model for controller tuning is homoscedastic Gaussian distributed independent noise. Homoscedastic means that the noise distribution has the same vari-ance independent of the parameters. Homoscedastic Gaussian noise has two major advantages: It is analyt-ically tractable in the GP framework and has only one hyperparameter, the variance of the observation noise. However, the homoscedastic assumption may not hold in practice. Thus, heteroscedastic, i.e., parameter-dependent, noise has been considered in controller tuning problems (Ariizumi et al., 2017; Guzman et al., 2020, 2022) and robot learning, e.g., (Kuindersma et al., 2012). Heteroscedastic noise models typically have more parameters and therefore, more data points tend to be needed to accurately estimate the noise level. One disadvantage of the Gaussian likelihood is that outliers far away from the center of the distribution are very unlikely to be observed. Therefore, outliers heavily deteriorate prediction accuracies in GPs with Gaussian likelihood. To address this, e.g., Martinez-Cantin et al. (2018), propose an outlier detection method based on the Student’s-t-likelihood. Student’s-t-distributions are heavier-tailed than Gaussian distributions, i.e., they are less susceptible to outliers. Optimization with a Student’s-t-likelihood was also applied for Kalman filter tuning in (Bertipaglia et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2019b) and controller tuning (Sasaki et al., 2020; Stenger et al., 2020). However, a Student’s-t-likelihood has an additional hyperparameter compared to a Gaussian likelihood and thus tends to need more data to be fitted accurately. Another special case arises when the objective func-tion evaluation is deterministic. However, when chang-ing parameters slightly, we get a noise-like perturbation of the trend we are interested in. These perturbations may be lumped in the noise model of the GP . This be-havior is sometimes called deterministic noise (Forrester et al., 2006). Deterministic noise needs to be addressed explicitly in the acquisition function because querying the objective function twice at the same location does not result in new information. 

Recommended starting point: Homoscedastic Gaus-sian noise. It is the most popular model with the fewest hyperparameters. However, it is essential to distinctly treat outliers and deterministic noise should they occur. 

Kernel. As discussed in Sec. 3.1 the kernel function ex-presses the correlations of the output given the input and can express, for example, smoothness or periodicity. The most commonly used kernels are the squared exponen-tial (SE) and kernels from the Matérn family (cf. Fig. 4). For both, the correlations between two experiments sim-ply decrease with increasing distance in the parameter space. They differ in their smoothness assumptions. The SE kernel assumes functions are in C∞ where the Matérn kernel can be parameterized to be less smooth. Compar-ative studies on controller tuning (Le Riche and Picheny, 2021; Snoek et al., 2012; Stenger and Abel, 2022b) show ambiguous results. Kernels can be further categorized in isotropic and anisotropic, i.e., same length scale for all dimensions, or different length scales for all dimensions (also called automated relevance detection (ARD)). In general, an ARD kernel is more expressive and can better model the objective function landscape. However, it comes with more hyperparameters, and therefore, more data points are needed to fit the model. Using a hyperprior (see paragraph on model selection and hyperparameters) can effectively address this issue. Additionally, kernels can be characterized as station-

> Page 10 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

ary and non-stationary. Stationary kernels model only the relative distance between the inputs. In contrast, non-stationary kernels also explicitly depend on in-put locations and therefore allow for higher flexibility. Usually, stationary kernels are used for BO. However, non-stationary kernels have shown promising results (Martinez-Cantin, 2017, 2019). The kernel choice is a powerful way to include ad-vanced prior domain knowledge. For example (Alonso et al., 2017) developed a specific kernel for the LQR controller. The studies (Antonova et al., 2017, 2020; Rai et al., 2018) design domain-specific kernels by lever-aging simulation results. This way the search space can be greatly reduced, e.g., from 50 to 2 parameters (Rai et al., 2018). (Jaquier et al., 2022, 2020) also use a domain-specific kernel for robot learning involving Riemannian manifolds. A different approach to encode prior knowledge on the objective function are shape constraints. This way as-sumptions about e.g., monotonicity or convexity, of the objective function can be enforced (Agrell, 2019; Brun-zema et al., 2022). 

Recommended starting point: Matérn or SE kernel with ARD. Both are fairly general and well established. 

Mean Function. As discussed in Sec. 3.1, the GP prior mean function heavily influences the extrapolation be-havior of the GP . As a result, it is an obvious way to in-clude prior knowledge in the optimization, e.g., (Lu et al., 2021). Usually in controller tuning or robot learning a constant or zero mean is chosen because no additional prior knowledge is available. In fact, only three (Culha et al., 2020; Pautrat et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2022) of the 110 reviewed hardware application papers (see Sec. 7.1) report a mean different from constant or zero. Note that a zero mean should only be used if the observations are scaled to have zero mean (see Sec. 5.3). While constant or zero mean functions are simple and widely used, they impose a very limited prior structure on the objective. In particular, far away from observed data, the GP posterior mean tends to revert to this constant baseline and therefore cannot represent global trends in the objective function. This limitation has mo-tivated the use of more expressive mean functions in BO. For example, the benchmark by (Le Riche and Picheny, 2021) suggests that a quadratic prior mean function can be promising on synthetic functions. However, this find-ing could not be confirmed for deterministic controller tuning tasks (Stenger and Abel, 2022b). Still, (Tang et al., 2022) used second-order polynomials as mean functions in a real-world engine calibration task. Blind kriging (Joseph et al., 2008) is one way to automatically find the prior mean functions in GPs. Some preliminary work on blind kriging in BO (Mai et al., 2022; Stenger et al., 2019) has shown some promising results that may be worth exploring in a control and robotics setting. If low-fidelity (e.g., simulator) data is available, it can be leveraged to construct the GP’s prior mean func-tion, e.g., (Lu et al., 2021). However, the correct prior model, i.e., the correct simulation parameters may not always be known. This is why Pautrat et al. (2018) pro-posed a method to choose the best prior mean function from a set of prior models constructed with differently parametrized simulations automatically. Experimental results from related systems can also be beneficial. In fact, (Culha et al., 2020) have shown that reusing the posterior mean of a related system as the prior mean of a slightly different robot can be beneficial. 

Recommended starting point: Zero or constant mean in combination with standardized observations. In most cases no additional prior knowledge is avail-able. 

Model Selection & Hyperpriors. Fig. 4 summarizes how GP hyperparameters are commonly selected in prac-tice. Three main approaches are used: fixing them a pri-ori, estimating them online by maximum-likelihood es-timation (MLE), or estimating them using maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimation, see Sec. 3.1. In practice, fixing GP hyperparameters a priori can be difficult and a poor choice can lead to inefficient or un-successful optimization. Fortunately, many applications demonstrate that BO can still perform well without prior hyperparameter knowledge by adapting the GP hyperpa-rameters online by maximizing the marginal likelihood as new observations become available. However, the MLE approach can result in hyperparam-eters that contradict engineering domain knowledge, for example, extremely small or large observation noise. An effective tool to introduce mild domain knowledge without fixing hyperparameters is to use MAP . This way, for example, length scales and observation noise can be roughly bounded to realistic ranges without precisely fix-ing them. Commonly used hyperpriors for length scales are box-hyperpriors e.g., (Stenger, 2023), in a unit cube domain, Gamma-hyperpriors (e.g., (Gabler and Woll-herr, 2022)), and log-normal hyperprior (e.g., (Hvarfner et al., 2024)). To save computational overhead for hyperparameter optimization, one can consider only retraining after, e.g., 10 iterations (Polonio et al., 2022). From a theoretical point of view, decreasing the length scale over the course of optimization seems promising (Berkenkamp et al., 2019). However, for high dimen-sional problems this is not practical. In fact, pushing hy-perparameter optimization toward larger length scales has empirically demonstrated great potential (Hvarfner et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025) even for higher-dimensional tasks. A suitable range for the noise hyperprior can be de-termined by repeatedly evaluating an initial parametriza-tion before optimization. 

Recommended starting point: Maximum a-posteriori estimation effectively biases hyperpa-rameters to sensible ranges while requiring little prior knowledge. 

> Page 11 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

5.2 Acquisition Function 

The maximum of the acquisition function determines the location of the next sample. It resolves the trade-off between exploration and exploitation (9). We refer to Sec. 6 for acquisition functions addressing advanced challenges in BO. Acquisition functions can be divided into four cat-egories: (i) Optimistic , e.g., upper confidence bound (UCB) (Auer, 2002), (ii) Improvement-based , e.g., prob-ability of improvement (PI), expected improvement (EI) (Jones et al., 1998)), log expected improvement (logEI) (Ament et al., 2023) (iii) Information theoretic ,e.g., entropy search (Hennig and Schuler, 2012), pre-dictive entropy search (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014), max-value entropy search (MES) (Wang and Jegelka, 2017), joint entropy search (Hvarfner et al., 2022a; Tu et al., 2022), and local entropy search (Stenger et al., 2026) (iv) Thompson sampling (e.g., (Agrawal and Goyal, 2013)) We refer to (Garnett, 2022) for a detailed explanation and broader introduction to acquisition functions. In principle, all of these acquisition functions can be used for controller tuning tasks. This is reflected by the diverse usage statistics Fig. 4. From an empirical point of view, it is inconclusive which acquisition functions perform best on a wide range of controller tuning tasks. Different acquisition functions have been compared for one specific applica-tion, e.g., in (Calandra et al., 2016; Neumann-Brosig et al., 2019; von Rohr et al., 2018), from which we cannot draw general conclusions. In a controller tuning benchmark on ten deterministic simulative controllers (Stenger and Abel, 2022b), it was shown that EI and MES performed similarly on average, with UCB perform-ing slightly worse. The ambiguity of the results, i.e., the dependency of the preferred BO setup on the test case, supports the findings of (Turner et al., 2021), where BO ensembles using various acquisition functions and surrogate models performed best. From a practical point of view, it needs to be consid-ered that UCB has an influential hyperparameter β that balances exploration and exploitation. While there exist theory on how β should be chosen to guarantee conver-gence (Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017; Srinivas et al., 2010), it can in practice result in too much exploration and undesirable empirical performance. To still have a 

β that follows insights from theoretical investigations, i.e., it should logarithmically increase over time. Kan-dasamy et al. (2015) propose to set β = 0.2 d log (2k).However, such a heuristic is rarely used in practice and it is currently more popular to set β to a fixed value. A recent extension to EI, logEI (Ament et al., 2023), has shown great performance even in high-dimensional problems (Hvarfner et al., 2024). However, care must be taken when using the expected improvement in the noisy setting. The standard formulation originally devel-oped for the deterministic case should not be used in the noisy case see, e.g., (Letham et al., 2019). However, the popularity of standard EI in control and robotics (Fig. 4) suggests that in practice it may still be fine to use stan-dard EI even in noisy cases. Information-theoretic acquisition functions do not have influential hyperparameters except for approxi-mation accuracies and can be used in the noisy and noiseless case. However, with the exception of MES, they are usually rather expensive to evaluate and special care needs to be taken in high-dimensional optimization problems. To circumvent a fixed acquisition function choice, different approaches were developed to automatically select GP-acquisition functions e.g., (Benjamins et al., 2022; Hoffman et al., 2011; Vasconcelos et al., 2022). However, those methods are almost never applied in control and robotics. One exception is the application of GP-HEDGE (Hoffman et al., 2011) to robot learn-ing (Daniel et al., 2014) where it did not achieve a performance increase. Above, we discussed myopic, i.e., one-step optimal, ac-quisition functions because they are mainly used in con-trol and robotics. Non-myopic acquisition functions (see, e.g., (Yue and Kontar, 2020)) show great potential at the expense of more computational effort. Additionally, the acquisition function can be used to include prior user be-liefs in the optimization, e.g., (Hvarfner et al., 2022b). Any acquisition function has generally more than one local maximum. Therefore, in practice, globally search-ing algorithms, e.g., multi-start gradient descent or evo-lutionary algorithms should be used to optimize the ac-quisition function. 

Recommended starting point: Max-value entropy search for noisy and low-dimensional problems. It has no hyperparameters apart from approximation accu-racies and works in noisy and noiseless cases with an acceptable amount of overhead. logEI (Ament et al., 2023) for high-dimensional problems with low noise. It has shown exceptional performance in high dimen-sions in combination with high-lengthscale hyperpri-ors - see also Sec. 6.9 

5.3 Other Practical Consideration 

BO can benefit from initial data points . The initial data set can be uniformly random or, to reduce ran-domness and cover the whole search domain, generated using space-filling sampling (e.g., Sobol-sequences or latin hypercube sampling). Exceptions are cases where cautious or safe exploration is required. Le Riche and Picheny (2021) have shown that a small initial budget of d + 4 samples performs better than larger initial budgets for most of the examined synthetic objective functions. Results in (Stenger and Abel, 2022b) suggest that for deterministic tuning tasks d + 1 random initial samples may be sufficient for BO to outperform baseline optimization algorithms. To avoid numerical issues in the GP model and acquisition function optimization and decrease the problem-dependence of hyperparameter selection it is common practice to use data scaling (Golovin et al., 

> Page 12 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

2017). Specifically, we recommend scaling the input domain to the unit cube and normalize all outputs to zero mean and standard deviation of one. A stopping rule (Step 11 in Alg. 1) defines when the optimization is stopped. It is common practice to use a fixed number of evaluations or to stop the optimization when performance increase is sufficient. Alternative stop-ping rules can be derived from the confidence bounds of the GP or the value of the acquisition function. Promis-ing results on estimated model-based regret have been shown by Stenger et al. (2026); Wilson (2024). The naive way to select the final solution ˆθ ∗

(Step 12 in Alg. 1) would be to take the parametrization with the best observed objective function value. However, due to the noisy objective function evaluations, this best obser-vation does not have to occur for the best parametriza-tion. Instead, we recommend selecting the evaluated parametrization with the lowest posterior mean. 

Recommended starting point: Use d + 4 initial data points, scale input and output data, and select the fi-nal solution by minimizing the expected cost over all evaluated parameterizations 

## 6 Advanced Variants 

In this section, we review common challenges that fre-quently occur in BO for control and robotics, and we present advanced BO formulations to address these. Asummary is provided in Fig. 5. 

Key Messages 

The BO framework offers many extensions suitable for advanced problem settings in controller tuning (see Fig. 5.) 

6.1 Constrained BO 

Goal: Ensure final solution is feasible 

Example: Maximum overshoot is below some ad-missible maximum g max 

Available information: 

• Noisy samples of objective Jk

• Noisy samples of unknown constraint func-tion g k

Problem Statement. Formulating additional con-straints is likely necessary to ensure the practical fea-sibility of the tuned controller. For example, when minimizing the energy consumption of a reference track-ing controller, the maximum tracking error should be constrained. Otherwise, the optimal solution would be to set all controller gains to zero. A constrained optimization problem can be written as follows: 

θ ∗ = arg min  

> θ∈Rd

E [J(θ )] (10) s.t. θ min ≤ θ ≤ θ max (11) P(g (θ ) ≤ g max ) ≥ α (12) 

h(θ ) ≤ hmax (13) 

Unknown constraints (12) can only be evaluated by querying the black-box experiment. Thus, the constraint function g (θ ) is calculated from the time-domain be-havior in the same way as the objective function. Due to the potential stochasticity of the closed-loop system, a probabilistic constraint formulation has to be used, i.e., the threshold g max must not be exceeded with probability α. Arbitrary constraint formulations can be chosen. Practical examples include not exceeding a critical process temperature. Note that the unknown constraints can also be binary. In contrast, known constraints h(θ ) (13) can be evaluated analytically without querying the closed-loop system. Examples of known constraints are analytical stability requirements (Dörschel* et al., 2021) or box constraints. The search domain Θ (cf. 2) is defined in terms of the known con-straints: Θ = θ ∈ Rd |θ min ≤ θ ≤ θ max ∧ h(θ ) ≤ hmax .In contrast to safe BO (cf. Sec. 6.2), constrained BO ex-plicitly allows constraint violations during optimization. Only the final solution is required to be feasible. The main challenge of constrained BO is to suggest feasible parameters and yield an improvement of the objective function value. 

Methods & Applications. Known constraints can di-rectly be included in the acquisition function optimiza-tion. Unknown constraints are more challenging. Usu-ally, an additional GPR model is formulated to estimate 

g (θ ). In the case of binary constraints, this is a classifica-tion model. Using these additional models, probabilistic predictions of constraint violations can be obtained and included in the acquisition function. Numerous acquisition functions were adapted to the constrained case and applied to controller and robotics tuning in hardware experiments (see table 3). The expected improvement criterion can be extended to the constrained case (e.g., (Gardner et al., 2014; Gelbart et al., 2014)) by multiplying the expected improvement with the probability of feasibility. This approach is used in (Khosravi et al., 2023) to optimize a CNC machine and in (Marco et al., 2021) for quadruped control. Con-strained expected improvement (EIC) requires an initial feasible point for optimization. Additionally, EI and EIC are not suitable for the noisy case without modifica-tions, e.g., (Letham et al., 2019). These shortcomings are, for example, alleviated by constrained max-value entropy search (CMES) (Perrone et al., 2019; Takeno et al., 2022), a constrained extension of the information-theoretic MES (Wang and Jegelka, 2017). A controller tuning hardware application of CMES can be found, for example, in (Stenger, 2023). Most constrained BO frameworks can also address binary constraints (cf.,   

> Page 13 of 37 D. Stenger et al. Control system Practical requirements Bayesian optimization with constraints Other variants Choosing a suitable Bayesian optimization setting
> Non-Euclidian decision space BO with crash constraints Safe BO Local BO New variant Multi-objective BO Preferential BO Contextual BO
> Adaptive Bayesian optimization
> Time-varying BO Constrained BO
> Controller Dynamical system

Figure 5. Overview of BO extensions for controller tuning and robot learning tasks presented in Sec. 6. They allow various practical requirements of controller tuning tasks to be formalized and solved with BO. (Pictograms are clickable) 

e.g., (Gelbart et al., 2014; Perrone et al., 2019)). A special case of constrained BO allows a limited fail-ure budget, e.g., (Marco et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022) with application to robotics (Yu et al., 2022). In this set-ting, only a limited number of constraint violations are allowed during optimization. This can be seen as an in-termediate case between safe and constrained BO (see 6.2). 

6.2 Safe BO 

Goal: Final solution and all samples have to be fea-sible 

Example: Maximum overshoot is always below 

g max 

Available information: 

• Noisy samples of objective Jk

• Noisy samples of unknown constraint func-tion g k

Problem Statement. When applying BO to safety-critical applications, safety constraints arise. Violating these safety constraints can lead to damage to the ex-perimental setup. One practical example is the reactor temperature never exceeding a critical threshold in chemical processes. Therefore, in safe BO, the objective function J should be optimized without violating any safety constraint in any iteration of the optimization process: 

θ ∗ = arg min   

> θ∈Θ

E [J(θ )] ,subject to g k ≤ g k,max ∀k = 1, ..., K, (14) where g k is the noisy realization of g (θ ). Achieving safety with known constraints (13) is straightforward, be-cause we can ensure before the experiment that chosen parameters are safe. The main challenge in safe BO is to find a set of safe decisions in each iteration and trade-off expanding the safe set while finding the optimum in the safe set. 

Methods & Applications. The general structure of safe BO algorithm is to determine the safe set, optimize the acquisition function in the safe set, and finally query the next point. One key assumption is that in the first iter-ation, an initial safe parameter set is given. Different safe BO methods introduce different variants of the de-termination of the safe set and vary in their exploration strategy. Sui et al. (2015) introduced the most popular ap-proach for identifying the safe set, which relies on confidence bounds. The assumptions in this setting are that the target function is from a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), is Lipschitz continuous, and ob-servations are perturbed with subgaussian noise. With these assumptions, one can ensure with high probability the unknown function is inside the confidence bounds, which can be defined as b(θ ) = μ(θ ) ± βσ (θ ), where 

β ≥ 0 is a parameter that determines the width of the confidence bounds. Different theoretical contribu-tions derive β (Abbasi-Yadkori, 2013; Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017; Molodchyk et al., 2025; Srinivas et al., 2010). However, these derivations are often conserva-tive and rely on a known or estimated (Tokmak et al., 2025) RKHS norm bound and a correct choice of the ker-nel. A detailed discussion on using confidence bounds in SafeOpt can be found in (Fiedler et al., 2024, 2021). In most practical applications, β is set to a constant heuris-tic value, e.g., β = 2 (Berkenkamp et al., 2023, 2016; König et al., 2021; Wischnewski et al., 2019) or β = 3(Baumann et al., 2021; Dörschel* et al., 2021). While such heuristics often invalidate theoretical guarantees, they may still yield useful “cautious” behavior in practice. Furthermore, safety also highly depends on the choice of the hyperparameters of the GP . Using a Matern kernel with ν = 3/2 and short lengthscales (Baumann et al., 2021; Berkenkamp et al., 2016; Weber et al., 2021; Wis-chnewski et al., 2019) is most common. Wischnewski et al. (2019) report safety violations due to the misspec-ification of GP hyperparameters. Consequently, many safe BO works have reported fixed GP-hyperparameters, e.g., (Baumann et al., 2021; Berkenkamp et al., 2016; Holzapfel et al., 2024; König et al., 2023; Schillinger et al., 2017; Weber et al., 2021; Widmer et al., 2023; 

> Page 14 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

Wischnewski et al., 2019). However, it is not always clear how to determine these hyperparameters for a truly unknown objective. In contrast to SafeOpt, Lipschitz only safe BO (LoSBO) (Fiedler et al., 2024) relies on the assumption of an known upper bound of the Lipschitz constant of the un-known function. In addition, bounded noise is assumed. In practice, determining an upper bound of the Lipschitz constant is not trivial. One approach for practitioners could be a sensitivity analysis or using a simulation for the estimation. Safe BO, especially SafeOpt and its variants, were used in numerous control applications such as quadro-tors (Berkenkamp et al., 2023, 2016; Holzapfel et al., 2024), rotational drive systems (König et al., 2021), a Furuta pendulum (Baumann et al., 2021), and legged locomotion task (Widmer et al., 2023). (Menn et al., 2024) applied the Lipschitz safe algorithm to automotive lateral controller tuning. 

6.3 Crash Constraints 

Goal: Optimize while experiments may fail depend-ing on the parameterizations 

Example: The system becomes unstable and the ex-periment has to be stopped prematurely 

Available information: 

• Boolean success indicator lc

> k

• Noisy sample of objective Jk only available if experiment is successful lc 

> k

= 1

Problem Statement. In some controller tuning prob-lems, (useful) query results Jk (and g k) may not be at-tainable for some parameter choices θ k. For example, imagine querying the cart-pole controller with an unsta-ble parametrization. Then, the experiment may have to be stopped to prevent damage to the hardware, or the ob-jective function value would grow extremely large. Other reasons for episodes not being completed successfully in-clude: operators or automatic safety functions aborting experiments if dangerous system behavior is perceived. This setting is known as learning with crash constraints 

(LCC) (Marco et al., 2021). Crash constraints can be modeled by introducing an additional binary response 

lc(θ ). In this case the black box returns an additional bi-nary lc 

> k

when queried. It equals one ( lc 

> k

= 1) if the black-box evaluation was successful, and equals zero ( lc 

> k

= 0) otherwise. In the case of lc 

> k

= 0, the objective function value is unavailable Jk = ; and cannot be added as a new sample point to the data set. The modified version of the single-objective problem can be written as: 

θ ∗ = arg min   

> θ∈Θ

E [J(θ )] 

P(lc(θ ) = 1) > α . (15) The main challenge in the LCC setting is to steer opti-mization away from the crash region without the avail-ability of the function value. 

Methods & Applications. A simple heuristic to deal with crash constraints is a fixed penalty for crashed evaluations (e.g., (Marco et al., 2016; Shahrokhshahi et al., 2022)), or to use data obtained before the crash (e.g., (Calandra et al., 2016)). However, it may require substantial expert domain knowledge to design the objective function such that smoothness at the borders between crashed and successful evaluations is preserved. Smoothness at the borders between crashed and suc-cessful evaluations is important for using GPR models as surrogate models. Another heuristic approach is to introduce virtual data points based on pessimistic GP predictions (BO-VDP) (Stenger and Abel, 2022b). This can be easily combined with other BO settings such as constrained BO (Stenger et al., 2022), multi-objective BO (Stenger et al., 2023b), contextual BO (Stenger, 2023), and local BO (von Rohr et al., 2024) without adjusting the acquisition function. Other approaches include a probabilistic classifier to identify infeasible parameters (e.g., (Chakrabarty et al., 2022b; Kato et al., 2017; Lindberg and Lee, 2015)). However, this requires training an additional probabilis-tic classification model with additional hyperparameters. Alternatives are Marco et al. (2021); Wang and Li (2024). Both introduce GP models capable of combining regression and classification, and combine them with constrained BO. These methods require additional GP models and adjusting the acquisition functions in case of otherwise unconstrained optimization problems. In some cases, unsuccessful evaluations, e.g., ex-tremely large objective evaluations, need to be detected first. For that purpose, for example, Martinez-Cantin et al. (2018) proposed a method based on robust regres-sion using a student-t likelihood. 

6.4 Multi-Objective BO 

Goal: Simultaneously optimize (potentially) con-flicting objectives 

Example: Tracking accuracy vs. energy consump-tion 

Available information: 

• Noisy samples of M objectives (Jk,1 , . . . , Jk,M )

Problem Statement. There is often more than one ob-jective in control engineering tuning tasks. Typical exam-ples are the trade-off between energy consumption and tracking performance or rise time and overshoot. Con-flicting objectives can be combined into one objective by weighted summation. Alternatively, the problem can be reformulated as a constrained optimization problem (cf. Sec. 6.1). Both methods require additional prior infor-mation. Either the objective function weights have to be specified a-priori or constraint thresholds need to be known. In contrast, the goal in multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) is to simultaneously optimize M

(possibly) conflicting objectives J1(θ ), J2(θ ), . . . , JM (θ ):

> Page 15 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

min   

> θ∈Θ

E [J1(θ )] , E [J2(θ )] , . . . , E [JM (θ )] (16) Each experiment returns a noisy sample of each of the 

M objectives (Jk,1 , . . . , Jk,M ). Instead of searching for one optimal parametrization θ ∗, the solution to (16) is a set of non-dominated or Pareto-optimal parameterizations. Loosely speaking, a parametrization is Pareto optimal if there is no other parametrization that is better in all per-formance metrics. A practitioner can, after the optimiza-tion, decide on one parameterization from the Pareto-optimal solution set to balance the conflict between the competing objectives individually. The main challenge of MOBO is to propose parameters that improve the current set of Pareto optimal solutions instead of only improving a single metric. 

Methods & Applications. It is common MOBO prac-tice to model each objective function with a separate GP model. The acquisition function now represents the util-ity of improving over the current set of Pareto optimal designs. One popular indicator for the quality of a Pareto front is the hypervolume indicator. The expected im-provement of the hypervolume (EIHV) (Emmerich et al., 2008) seeks to increase the hypervolume and is a common MOBO acquisition function. Examples in control and robot learning on real hardware include gait optimization (Ariizumi et al., 2017; Tesch et al., 2013), mobile robotics (Kato et al., 2017), and trading of performance and robustness (Matteo et al., 2020). However, more recent work in other domains has shown that Thompson sampling efficient multi-objective optimization (TSEMO) (Bradford et al., 2018) and the expected improvement-matrix criterion (Zhan et al., 2017) (EIM) perform competitively to the EIHV criterion, while reducing computational overhead. TSEMO was also applied to multi-objective MPC tuning with crash constraints in simulation (Stenger et al., 2023b). EIM was used by Tang et al. (2022) for engine calibration on real hardware. 

6.5 Preferential BO 

Goal: Optimize with (subjective) human feedback given as pairwise comparisons 

Example: The step response for experiment with 

θ k looks better than with θ ′

> k

Available information: 

• Subjective preferences pk (θ k is preferred over θ ′

> k

)

Problem Statement. Above, we assumed that the ob-jective can be quantified in mathematical terms and re-covered numerically from the trajectory data measured during an episode (4). This is, for example, the case when optimizing energy consumption or tracking perfor-mance. However, finding an exact mathematical cost function formulation can be challenging when consider-ing more complex requirements such as comfort. This may result in tedious tuning of the cost function, which is often time-consuming and requires multiple optimiza-tion runs. Consequently, in some applications, the tuning effort is only shifted from controller parameter tuning to objective function tuning. This observation gives rise to BO paradigms where subjective human preferences are used as feedback dur-ing optimization. In the narrow sense, preferential BO (González et al., 2017) refers to noisy binary feedback: We still want to solve the global optimization problem of finding: 

θ ∗ = arg min   

> θ∈Θ

E [J(θ )] (17) However now, we do not receive samples of the objec-tive function Jk. Instead, information about J(θ ) can only be obtained by evaluating in pairs of points or duels θ k, θ ′

> k

 ∈ Θ × Θ from which we obtain binary feedback 

pk ∈ { 0, 1 } that represents whether or not θ k is preferred over θ ′

> k

.In the related coactive feedback framework (Shiv-aswamy and Joachims, 2012) the user actively chooses a query instead of the query suggested by the algorithm. This way prior engineering expertise can be included in the tuning process. The combination of preferential and coactive feedback is referred to as mixed-initiative learning (Lester et al., 1999; Tucker et al., 2022). The main challenge of PBO is that the objective func-tion is not directly accessible, and the acquisition func-tion has to select pairs of parameter combinations for the user to compare. 

Methods & Applications. Methods addressing the pref-erential BO setting have been developed mainly outside of the control and robotics community by, e.g., Astudillo et al. (2023); González et al. (2017); Xu et al. (2024a). The main idea centers around modeling the preference function using a GP J(θ ) and capturing the user pref-erences through e.g., a probit likelihood. Exact poste-rior GP inference becomes intractable due to the non-Gaussian likelihood, this is why approximations such as the Laplace approximation have to be used. Early hardware applications of PBO in robotics are presented by (Gras et al., 2018; Thatte et al., 2017). A relatively recent PBO framework is POLAR (Tucker et al., 2022) that was applied to various robotics applications (Cosner et al., 2022; Csomay-Shanklin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a; Tucker et al., 2020a, 2021, 2020b). PO-LAR uses a Thompson sampling approach on subspaces. However, Thompson sampling was reportedly outper-formed by more recent PBO variants e.g., (Astudillo et al., 2023). EUBO (Astudillo et al., 2023) has been used for controller tuning in simulation and was shown to satisfy user preferences quicker than random search and multi-objective BO (Coutinho et al., 2024). An alternative popular approach for preferential black-box optimization based on a radial-basis function sur-rogate model is GLISP (Bemporad and Piga, 2019). It was for example applied in (Mengjia et al., 2021) to an MPC controller for lane-keeping and obstacle-avoidance 

> Page 16 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

in autonomous driving and various robotics applications e.g., (Campagna et al., 2024; Roveda et al., 2023). How-ever, to our knowledge, GLISP has not been compared to recent PBO variants. Subjective human feedback has also been used in BO for robotics and control in hardware experiments (e.g., (Deneault et al., 2025; Junge et al., 2020; Matsub-ara et al., 2016; TRAN et al., 2025)) using real-valued feedback and non-preferential standard BO. However, rating the performance on a real-valued scale is expected to be a lot harder for humans than just deciding whether performance θ k is superior to performance θ ′

> k

.

6.6 Contextual BO 

Goal: Find optimal parameters as a function of a context 

Example: Gait parameters as a function of surface roughness 

Available information: 

• Noisy sample of objective Jk given the con-text sk

Problem Statement. The choice of optimal controller parametrizations may depend on additional operating conditions. For example, the optimal parametrization of a controller for climate control may depend on the ambient temperature (Fiducioso et al., 2019; Stenger et al., 2023a). If performance-critical operating condi-tions are known before the start of the episode, they can be explicitly considered in the surrogate model in BO to solve the context-dependent optimization problem. From a control engineering perspective, the context can be seen as a disturbance with an impact on controller performance that is sufficiently well represented by a constant over the experimental episode. Instead of searching for one optimal parametrization 

θ ∗, contextual BO searches for a function θ ∗(s) that gives optimal parameters depending on the context value(s) s, e.g., ambient temperature. This function is closely related to gain scheduling from control engi-neering. The contextual unconstrained single-objective problem is stated as follows: 

θ ∗(s) = arg min   

> θ∈Θ

E [J(θ , s)] 

s.t. smin ≤ s ≤ smax 

(18) In the temperature example, the context is set by the en-vironment. In this case, there are two interactions with the environment. First, the context sk is revealed by the environment, and then the BO algorithm suggests param-eters for this context by optimizing the acquisition func-tion for that context. They are then evaluated on the black-box function. In offline contextual BO, see (Char et al., 2019; Chung et al., 2020), the context is also chosen by the BO al-gorithm. With few exceptions, e.g., (Le and Malikopou-los, 2025), this has received very limited attention in BO for control and robot learning, A related BO paradigm is multi-task BO (Swersky et al., 2013), see Sec. 6.10. 

Methods & Applications. Contextual BO can be real-ized by adding the contextual variables as additional in-puts to the GP of the objective function (and the GP of the constraints). Here, often a product kernel is used. Then, the acquisition function can be maximized for the con-text provided by the environment. This way, the classi-cal GP-UCB algorithm can be extended to the contextual case (Krause and Ong, 2011). However, care needs to be taken when using expected improvement in the con-textual setting because there does not exist a single best solution .Experimental applications were presented in (Fröhlich et al., 2021) for an autonomous race car, in (Berkenkamp et al., 2023) for a quad-rotor in (König et al., 2021) for a rotational motion system, in (Stenger, 2023, Sec. 6.3) for a three-tank system, in (Yu et al., 2022) for a legged robot, in (Zhang et al., 2024) for quadruped locomotion, and in (Widmer et al., 2023). The contributions (Berkenkamp et al., 2023; König et al., 2021; Widmer et al., 2023) demonstrate, how contextual BO can be combined with safe exploration. This combination can be achieved relatively straightfor-wardly by calculating the safe set only for the current context. 

6.7 Time-Varying BO 

Goal: Track optimal solution through time 

Example: Adjust parameters as actuators experi-ence wear 

Available information: 

• Noisy sample of objective Jk at time step 

k ∈ I1: T := {1, . . . , T }

Problem Statement. So far we have discussed differ-ent approaches to find the optimum of a time-invariant 

objective function. However, especially in the context of control, the objective may be time-varying due to ongo-ing changes on the dynamical system or changes in the objective. Considering time-variations in the objective fundamen-tally changes the optimization problem. It is no longer of interest to find one optimal solution (or a Pareto front), but the goal is to track an optimal solution through time as 

θ ∗ 

> k

= arg min   

> θ∈Θ

Jk(θ ), (19) where subscript k denotes the time dependency of the objective and its optimizer. In this setting, an al-gorithm chooses a query θ k ∈ Θ at each time step 

k ∈ I1: T := {1, . . . , T }. The objective function’s time dependency also changes the exploration-exploitation trade-off, as the optimal decision and the information a decision maker gains from each query are now affected by time, and any collected dataset can become stale. Time-varying BO can also be considered as contextual 

> Page 17 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

BO (cf. Sec. 6.6) but with the key characteristic that the time context is strictly increasing and each context only occurs once. 

Methods & Applications. Finding a suitable strategy to deal with stale data is the core question surrounding research in time-varying BO. Here, two main strategies have emerged. The first strategy is to explicitly incorpo-rate assumptions about the temporal changes in the un-derlying GP model (Bardou et al., 2024; Bogunovic et al., 2016; Brunzema et al., 2022; Cho et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2022; Gao and Bai, 2022; Nyikosa et al., 2018) resulting in a so-called spatio-temporal GP . The second strategy is to use a time-invariant GP model and cope with stale data by deleting it through resets (Bogunovic et al., 2016; Brunzema et al., 2025b; Holzapfel et al., 2024; Zhou and Shroff, 2021) or a sliding window (Zhou and Shroff, 2021). Both approaches have specific advantages and draw-backs. When prior knowledge about the temporal dynamics of the objective is available, integrating this knowledge into the GP model can yield superior perfor-mance as the surrogate can effectively guide the search. However, prior information on temporal properties is not always available or reliable. In these cases, adaptive methods that detect and respond to changes online show promise (Brunzema et al., 2022; Holzapfel et al., 2024). These methods face the challenge of fitting a time-invariant GP to time-varying data, which requires careful selection of hyperpriors for parameters like length scales and noise variance, and thus relies more heavily on prior knowledge of spatial properties of the objective (Bardou et al., 2024; Brunzema et al., 2025b). Most work in time-varying BO has focused on deriving theoretical guarantees and identifying the regularity assumptions on temporal changes needed to achieve sub-linear regret. Still, some papers also highlight the practical applications of these approaches, demonstrat-ing time-varying BO yields improved performance in real-world settings. In the following, we list some of its applications to controller tuning. For example, event-triggered adaptation in combination with ideas from safe BO (cf. Sec. 6.2) has been effectively applied to tuning the position controller of a quadcopter with time-varying dynamics (Holzapfel et al., 2024). Similarly, König et al. (2021) combine safety with time-varying BO but using the spatio-temporal model of Bogunovic et al. (2016) instead of an adaptive approach. They demonstrate the efficacy of their method in the simulation of a controller tuning task of a rotational axis drive under a linear drift of the rotation damping coefficient. The spatio-temporal model from Brunzema et al. (2022) was also extended with positional encoding by Cho et al. (2024) for tuning an MPC for a plasma-assisted deposition process. 

6.8 Decision Spaces: Optimize Integer or Categorical Variables 

Goal: Optimize over non-real-valued parameter spaces Θ̸ ⊆ Rd

Example: the prediction horizon of an MPC 

Available information: 

• Noisy sample of objective Jk

Problem Statement. An additional challenge for auto-matic controller tuning are parameter spaces that are not sets of real numbers. The problem is 

θ ∗ = arg min   

> θ∈Θ

J(θ ) (20) where Θ̸ ⊆ Rd . Examples are integer variables such as the horizon length in MPC or discrete choices such as the usage of an additional filter or feed-forward controller component. 

Methods & Applications. From a method perspective BO over discrete spaces has two additional challenges. First, we need to find a suitable GP to model correlations in combinatorial spaces and, second, the optimization of the acquisition itself now involves the solution to a com-binatorial problem. Methods like SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011) and BOCS (Baptista and Poloczek, 2018) introduced tree-based surrogates and sparse regression with one-hot encoding, while (Dadkhahi et al., 2022) improved encoding effi-ciency. Neural network surrogates (Häse et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2018), modified kernels in Casmopolitan (Wan et al., 2021), and discrete diffusion kernels in COMBO (Oh et al., 2019) and HyBO (Deshwal et al., 2021) enhanced interaction modeling. To tackle high-dimensional spaces, (Deshwal et al., 2023) proposed low-dimensional embeddings for discrete search spaces. The problem of optimizing over discrete spaces can be circumvented by rephrasing the problem into a proba-bilistic one by optimizing over the continous parameters of discrete probability distributions (Daulton et al., 2022). Recently, CBOSS (Rath et al., 2024) has been introduced as method for combinatorial BO with both constraints (Sec. 6.1) and crash constraint (Sec. 6.3). CBOSS has been applied to find a real-time capable parametrization for a digital twin of an electric vehicle for a driving simulator. Other studies have applied BO to tune the horizon length in MPC, an integer valued parameter, however, they do not report on the details of their method (Lucchini et al., 2020; Stenger et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2024). 

6.9 Local BO 

Goal: Search for a local optimum that is close to an initial design θ 0

Example: Incremental improvement over aparametrization derived from a linearized dynam-

> Page 18 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

ics model 

Available information: 

• Noisy sample of objective Jk

Problem Statement. While it is generally desirable to find a globally optimal controller parameterization this goal may not be achievable or cost effective in practice. Whenever the parameter set Θ is too large to effectively search through or we already have a good guess where in the domain the optimal parameters are we can resort to 

local optimization. Local optimization methods require the user to provide an additional parameter, the initial guess θ 0 that implicitly defines the local neighborhood 

Θ(θ 0) within which we restrict the search. The problem formulation is then given as 

θ ∗ = arg min    

> θ∈Θ(θ0)

J(θ ). (21) Local optimization produces a sequence of parameters 

{θ 0, θ 1, . . . } where each set of parameters improves over the previous one and is “close” to the previous one. Next to their higher effectiveness in large domains these local search variants can have additional benefits for controller tuning. Local methods exhibit continu-ous improvement, and local exploration which can avoid evaluating unstable parameters. As an additional benefit, these algorithms can be perceived as more intuitive due to smaller and local updates, making these algorithms easier to deploy and tune. Local optimization can also help if a suitable domain of the tuning parameters Θ is unknown. Often, these need to be carefully chosen (see for example (Roveda et al., 2020b)) in order for BO to find good solutions in the desired number of iterations. Nevertheless, local optimization is sensitive to the initial parameters θ 0 and may yield sub-optimal solutions. 

Methods & Applications. In the literature two main approaches are commonly used, trust-regions (Eriksson and Poloczek, 2021; Fröhlich et al., 2021; Fröhlich Lukas P. et al., 2019; Park, 2020; Park and Law, 2016) and line-search (Brunzema and Trimpe, 2025; Kirschner et al., 2019; Müller et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2023). Trust-region BO such as TurBO (Eriksson and Poloczek, 2021) maintain a small subset of the domain Θ in which it executes the BO proce-dure. In TurBO the subset expands when the optimizer is able to improve upon its previous candidate and shrinks when it fails to do so. Line search methods maintain a current candidate parametrization and iteratively choose a search direction and step size to improve the candidate. For example, gradient information BO (GIBO) (Müller et al., 2021) leverages the GP model of the objectives gradient ∇J to find its search direction and step size. Similarly, DescentLineBO (Kirschner et al., 2019) selects search direction based on a gradient estimation and then a full BO to find the optimum on the subspace defined by the search direction. BayeSQP (Brunzema and Trimpe, 2025) leverages similar ideas in combina-tion with classic sequential quadratic programming for local constrained BO. Stenger et al. (2026) extends the information-theoretic entropy search paradigm to local BO. Menn et al. (2026) investigates several of the local BO approaches discussed above in the context of prefer-ential BO. In von Rohr et al. (2024), the authors use an extended version of GIBO with crash constraints to tune PID, LQR, and MPC controller on a simulated three-tank system and PID controllers on hardware. Trust-region based methods are used in the studies by Park and Law (2016) and Park (2020) and applied to a wind farm control problem with hardware experiments in (Park and Law, 2016). 

6.10 Further Variants 

We briefly review further BO variants relevant for con-troller tuning and robotics. In multi-fidelity optimization, e.g., (He et al., 2025; Kandasamy et al., 2019; Marco et al., 2017; Nobar et al., 2024; Sorourifar et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2025; Tang and Paulson, 2024), the goal is to combine information obtained from multiple sources with different accuracy and evaluation costs. In the con-text of tuning for robotics and control, a simulation may be a low-fidelity information source: it is fast to evalu-ate but may lack accuracy. In contrast, the real hardware experiment is a high-fidelity information source: it is ex-pensive to evaluate but is highly accurate as it represents the target system. In multi-task (Swersky et al., 2013) BO knowledge is transferred from one task to another during the learn-ing process. The term multi-task BO is rarely used in BO for control or robotics. One exception is (Lübsen et al., 2024), where safety is combined with multi-task BO. However, the paper (Lübsen et al., 2024) could also be classified as multi-fidelity safe BO. Another exception is (Sasaki et al., 2020) where results from previous opti-mization are reused. The vast majority of BO for controller tuning conduct experiments of fixed episode length. In contrast, early stopping BO (ESBO) detects sub-optimality, e.g., oscilla-tions, early in the episode and decides when to stop an episode to reduce overall experimentation time. ESBO is a popular framework in ML hyperparameter tuning (see e.g., (Swersky et al., 2014)) and has recently been trans-ferred to the control domain in simulation (Hirt et al., 2024) and hardware experiments (Stenger et al., 2024). 

Batch or parallel BO considers parallel objective func-tion evaluations. Batch BO is less relevant for tuning in control and robotics because usually, only one instance of the physical system is available for optimization. A sim-ulation example for hardware and control co-design can be found in (Baheri and Vermillion, 2019) or for robot cooking with human feedback (Junge et al., 2020). Standard BO assumes that there is no cost associated with changing parameters from one iteration to another. However, imagine a process where one parameter is a temperature and it takes a significant amount of time to change the process temperature in between batch runs. This cost incurred by changing the parameters is called 

path-dependent or switching cost . Local BO versions im-

> Page 19 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

plicitly prefer small parameter changes and thus produce less path-dependent costs than global BO versions. Fur-thermore, specific acquisition functions were developed e.g., (Folch et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Recent work has also begun to integrate large lan-guage models (LLMs) into BO. LLAMBO (Liu et al., 2024) leverages LLMs for warm-starting and candidate generation, while BORA (Cissé et al., 2025) uses LLMs to incorporate contextual and domain knowledge into the optimization process. For controller tuning, agentic BO (Brunzema et al., 2026) could combine requirements, documentation, code, and guidance by a domain expert to guide and adapt an uncertainty-aware search. While this direction may improve sample efficiency, important open questions remain regarding safety and reliability, and these methods still require thorough validation in real-world hardware settings. 

## 7 Review of Practical Applications of BO 

This section systematically reviews applications of BO for controller tuning and robot learning focusing on online parameter tuning directly on hardware according the problem setting described in Sec. 2 and Sec. 6. Sec. 7.1 outlines the paper collection method and results are analyzed according to application domains (Sec. 7.2), optimized policy (Sec. 7.3), and problem formulation (Sec. 7.4). Other applications of BO in the control and robotics context are briefly reviewed in Sec. 7.5. 

Key Messages 

BO application domains are diverse ranging from lab-scale demonstrators to complex industrial pro-cesses (Sec. 7.2). The optimized control policies are equally diverse spanning simple PI controllers via MPC to the latent space of high-dimensional con-trollers (Sec. 7.3). Most reviewed applications use the vanilla problem formulation presented in Sec. 3 and low dimensional problems (Sec. 7.4). There are many BO applications in control and robotics such as planning tasks, offline tuning of state-estimators or robust controller optimization beyond the criteria defined in Sec. 7.1 (Sec. 7.5). 

7.1 Methodology 

We consider papers that meet the following criteria: (i) controller tuning that is performed online on hard-ware, i.e., each BO query evaluates a controller or policy on a hardware platform (for other use cases of BO in robotics and control, see Sec. 7.5), and (ii) published in 2025 or earlier. We search all papers with the term ‘Bayesian optimiza-tion’ in the title or abstract published in the ten most impactful venues in robotics and automatic control ac-cording to Google Scholar and the two most prominent control conferences (see Table 1). We additionally in-clude papers on hardware applications of BO from other venues without claiming exhaustiveness. In total, we re-viewed 110 papers meeting the above criteria. 

7.2 Application Domains 

Table 2 sorts the reviewed papers according to applica-tions. There is a significant amount (N = 26) of appli-cations to lab-scale demonstrators such as an inverted pendulum, or quadrotors. Those are easily accessible in most control and robotics labs and are primarily used to demonstrate that a new methodology, for example safe exploration (Berkenkamp et al., 2023) or time-varying BO (Holzapfel et al., 2024), works on hardware in prin-ciple. Additionally, Table 2 reveals cases where BO demon-strates practical benefits beyond lab-scale demonstrators. For example Menn et al. (2024); Savaia et al. (2021) show that BO allows to automatically calibrate vehi-cle suspension and path tracking controllers reducing required time and expertise when adapting controller parameters to new vehicles. BO was also shown to be particularly useful when experiments are conducted with the human in the loop (Kim et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023, 2022b; Wen et al., 2020; Zahedi et al., 2022). Here, controller parameters have to be adapted quickly to best cater to different human needs. When humans are in the loop it is particularly important to make experimentation time as short as possible, i.e., have high sample efficiency. Other use cases where accurate first principle model-ing is difficult and experimentation is expensive are wind farm control (Park and Law, 2016), complex industrial processes such as CNC-machines (Khosravi et al., 2023), and particle accelerators (Shalloo et al., 2020). Here BO reveals its potential to contribute to sustainable energy production, increased production efficiency, and scien-tific discovery in other research areas. 

7.3 Optimized Controller Type 

Our review shows that BO is indeed very flexible with respect to the optimized policies as postulated in Sec. 2. Examples include model predictive control (MPC) (e.g., (Fröhlich et al., 2021; Widmer et al., 2023)), LQR (e.g., (Marco et al., 2017, 2016)), PID (e.g., (Khosravi et al., 2023; Roveda et al., 2020b)), impedance control (Chen et al., 2023), neural network controllers (Fröhlich et al., 2021), grasping parameters (e.g., (Nishimura et al., 2017), (Lechuz-Sierra et al., 2024)) or gait pa-rameters (e.g., (Ariizumi et al., 2017; Calandra et al., 2016; Tesch et al., 2013)). It was also shown that BO can be applied to complex hierarchical controller structures (Gabler and Wollherr, 2022; Khosravi et al., 2023; Roveda et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2025a) and the latent space parameters of high-dimensional policies, e.g., (Antonova et al., 2020; Delgado-Guerrero et al., 2020a,b; Yu et al., 2019). However, Fig. 4 shows that the vast majority of hardware examples of BO optimize less than 10 parameters. To our knowledge, the highest dimensional hardware use case of BO has been reported by Fröhlich et al. (2021). This is in contrast to the more than 100 dimensional problems that are typically addressed in the literature on high-dimensional BO, e.g., (Hvarfner et al., 2024) in simulation. 

> Page 20 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

Table 1. Reviewed venues for the systematic literature search    

> Category Venues
> Control IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems; IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control; IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems; Automatica; IEEE /CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica; ISA Transactions; IEEE Trans. on Control Systems Technology; Annual Reviews in Control; Control Engineering Practice; Intl. Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control; Conference on Decision and Control; American Control Conference Robotics IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters; IEEE Intl. Conference on Robotics and Automation; Conference on Robot Learning; Science Robotics; Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing; IEEE Trans. on Robotics; IEEE /RSJ Intl. Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems; Robotics: Science and Systems; IEEE Trans. on Automation Science and Engineering; IEEE /ASME Trans. on Mechatronics

7.4 Problem Formulations 

We have presented in Sec. 6 that BO can be extended in many ways to address challenges arising in practical con-troller tuning tasks. Table 3 shows that real-world effi-ciency gains can be achieved even with the vanilla BO for-mulation (N = 57). The most popular extensions are un-known constraints, safe exploration and contextual BO. Still Table 3 shows that the current state of the art of BO methods is further developed than what is used in real-world applications beyond lab-scale demonstrators. Additionally, Table 3 reveals that if advanced problem formulations are used, most papers consider a single extension. Exceptions are for example safe-contextual (König et al., 2021), safe-time-varying (Holzapfel et al., 2024) or local-crash-constrained BO (von Rohr et al., 2024). 

7.5 Other Use Cases in Control and Robotics 

This section briefly summarizes other use cases of BO in control and robotics that do not match the problem defi-nition in Sec. 2 or the review criteria in Sec. 7.1. Above we discussed that BO can be used to tune the parameters of control policies. However, concepts from BO can be used directly for path planning tasks and environment exploration (Garcia-Barcos and Martinez-Cantin, 2021; Kiessling et al., 2025; Marchant and Ramos, 2012; Martinez-Cantin et al., 2009; Ramesh et al., 2022; Samaniego et al., 2021; Souza et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2024b). This is especially appealing in cases of achieving maximum information gain about some uncer-tain physical quantity e.g., bathymetry data (Kiessling et al., 2025) or tissue abnormalities (Salman et al., 2018). The main difference to the problem formulation in Sec. 2 is the GP modeling an unknown environment quantity instead of the closed-loop control performance. Similarly, concepts from BO can also be applied to find control inputs in repetitive tasks directly. The so-called 

run-to-run (R2R) control paradigm (Liu et al., 2018) is mostly known in biomedical engineering and semicon-ductor manufacturing (EWMA)(Liu et al., 2018). Tradi-tional methods for R2R control are ILC, MPC, and ex-ponentially weighted moving average (Liu et al., 2018). BO is increasing in popularity for the R2R paradigm (Cho et al., 2024; Moya-Lasheras and Sagues, 2020). Above we discussed how control algorithms can be op-timized for an already existing hardware system and a fixed controller. However, BO can also support control engineers and researchers during controller and hard-ware (co-)design. For example simulation studies with high-fidelity models can be used to fairly compare differ-ent controller structures (e.g., (Funk et al., 2021; Man-hães et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2020)). This way, it can be assessed objectively and automatically which controller structure is most suited for a given task before deploy-ment. Similarly, the whole guidance navigation and control (GNC) stack for AUVs (Stenger et al., 2022), mobile robots (Hossen et al., 2025) and parafoil landings (Polo-nio et al., 2022) can be jointly optimized with BO in simulation. By using automatic tuning, control engi-neers can quickly identify whether the GNC structure is feasible and quickly iterate between different structures. The optimal controller structure and parametrization depend on hardware design and in turn the hardware sizing depends on how efficiently the controller can use the available hardware resources. Thus, it may be ben-eficial to simultaneously optimize controller and hard-ware. Examples for controller and hardware co-design 

have been presented, e.g., for airborne Wind Energy Sys-tems (Baheri and Vermillion, 2019), a building chiller plant (Bhattacharya et al., 2021), a robotics system (Kim et al., 2021), a control-on-a-chip system (Chan et al., 2024) and a building energy system (Sorourifar et al., 2023). However, most of those works lack experimen-tal validation of the optimized design. One exception is presented by Bjelonic et al. (2023) where the optimized control and design of a quadruped is evaluated in real-world experiments. 

State estimation, perception and fault /anomaly detec-tion are sub-fields of control and robotics in which algo-rithms do not necessarily have to be optimized online. Instead labeled experimental data can be used offline to find the best parameterization. This often results in expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective functions where the optimized algorithms are simulated offline with varying parameters on real data. Thus numerous applications of automated observer design (Chakrabarty and Benosman, 2021; Delcaro et al., 2026) and Kalman filter tuning with recorded e.g., (Bertipaglia et al., 2022; Gehrt et al., 2020) or synthetic e.g., (Chen et al., 2019b, 2024, 2018; Moustakis et al., 2019; Nitsch et al., 2023) data have been reported. Optimization of fault diagno-sis algorithms has been done with experimental data, e.g., (Stenger and Abel, 2022a), and simulation data, 

> Page 21 of 37

D. Stenger et al. 

Table 2. BO paper with hardware experiments sorted with respect to application categories 

Category References Lab-scale demonstrators (N = 26) Cart Pole Marco et al. (2017), Pole Balancing with Robot Arm He et al. (2025); Marco et al. (2016), Quadrotor Bansal et al. (2017); Berkenkamp et al. (2023, 2016); Duivenvoorden et al. (2017); Holzapfel et al. (2024), Rotational Motion System König et al. (2021), Servo Motor Chen et al. (2019a), Furuta Pendulum Baumann et al. (2021); Fröhlich et al. (2021); Fröhlich Lukas P . et al. (2019); Matteo et al. (2020), Three Tank System von Rohr et al. (2024); Stenger (2023); Stenger et al. (2024), Linear Motion System Khosravi et al. (2022), Ball Throwing Yamawaki et al. (2024), Miniature Autonomous Racing Puigjaner et al. (2025), Rotary Motor System, Linear Motor System Nobar et al. (2024), RC Race Car Fröhlich et al. (2022), Temperature Control on Embedded Platform Bakaráˇ c et al. (2025), Mini Wheelbot Hose et al. (2025b), Turtlebot 3 Hossen et al. (2025), Mini Wheelbot, Cartpole Hose et al. (2025a) Locomotion ( N = 28) Quadruped Robot Cosner et al. (2022); Marco et al. (2021); Zhai et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2024); Zhu et al. (2019), Bipedal Walker Fox Calandra et al. (2014, 2016), Snake Robot Ariizumi et al. (2017); Tesch et al. (2011, 2013), Tracked Mobile Robot Kato et al. (2017), Legged Robot Widmer et al. (2023), 6-Legged Robot Pautrat et al. (2018), Laser-Plasma Accelerator Jalas et al. (2021), Bipedal Locomotion Yang et al. (2022b), Gait Optimization Lizotte et al. (2007), Humanoid Robot Hemker et al. (2009), Legged Robot Climbing Yu et al. (2022), Soft Quadruped Robot Tan et al. (2025), Mini Rover turning Kerimoglu et al. (2024), Continuous Quadruped Jumping Bellegarda et al. (2024), Micro Robot von Rohr et al. (2018), Robot Locomotion Yu et al. (2019), Robot Hopping Galljamov et al. (2021), Hexapod, Manipulation Antonova et al. (2020), ATRIAS Robot Antonova et al. (2017), Magneto-Elastomer Robot Walking Culha et al. (2020), Robot Balancing Kuindersma et al. (2012) Industrial and Process Control Systems (N = 11) Throttle Valve Control Neumann-Brosig et al. (2019), CNC Machine Khosravi et al. (2023), Laser Wakefield Accelerators Shalloo et al. (2020), Laser Powder Bed Fusion Kavas et al. (2025), Laser-Plasma Accelerator Jalas et al. (2021), Free Electron Laser Kirschner et al. (2019), Precision Motion System König et al. (2023), Current and Voltage Control Weber et al. (2021), High-Precision Motion Systems in Semiconductor Industry König et al. (2025), Waste Crane Sasaki et al. (2020), Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor Wang et al. (2025a) Robotics Manipulation (N = 17) 7-DOF Robot Arm Roveda et al. (2020b), Robotic Screw Insertion Gabler and Wollherr (2022), Robot Manipulation Drieß et al. (2017), Robotic Manipulation Chen et al. (2023); Röfer et al. (2024), Robotic Wiping Okada et al. (2023), Robotic Trajectory Tracking Roveda et al. (2020a), Robotic Force Controlled Assembly Processes Cheng and Chen (2014), Reaching Task Guzman et al. (2022), Soft Robotic Manipulation Zwane et al. (2024), Robot Grasping Daniel et al. (2014); Lechuz-Sierra et al. (2024), Robotic Soft Gripper Nishimura et al. (2017), Table Wiping, Rope Winding, Food Stirring Yang et al. (2022a), Hexapod, Manipulation Antonova et al. (2020), Robot Pouring Guevara et al. (2017), Robot Door Opening Englert and Toussaint (2016) Automotive ( N = 5) Autonomous Racing Fröhlich et al. (2021); Wischnewski et al. (2019), Semi Active Suspensions Savaia et al. (2021), Assisted Gearshift Settings Catenaro et al. (2025), Combustion Engine Tang et al. (2022) Medical ( N = 17) Exosuit Ding et al. (2018); Kim et al. (2019), Spatiotemporal Neurostimulations for Targeted Motor Outputs Laferrière et al. (2020), Robot-Assisted Upper Limb Training Zhang et al. (2023), Transfer Assistant Robot Matsubara et al. (2016), Robotic Knee Prothesis Li et al. (2023), Assist-As-Needed Robot-Aided Therapy Li et al. (2022b), Knee Exoskeleton Flexion Assistance Wang et al. (2025b), Surgical System Gras et al. (2018), Back-Support Exoskeleton Sochopoulos et al. (2023), Plasma Medicine Chan et al. (2023), Robotic Feeding Delgado-Guerrero et al. (2020b), Ankle-Foot Prosthesis Wen et al. (2020), Transfemoral Prosthesis Thatte et al. (2017), Exoskeleton Shahrokhshahi et al. (2022), Arm Exoskeleton Hamaya et al. (2019), Feeding Task and Shoe Fitting Delgado-Guerrero et al. (2020a) Other ( N = 8) Robotic Cooking Junge et al. (2020), Camera Attribute Control Kim et al. (2020), Active Flow Control Blanchard et al. (2021), Wind Farm Control Park and Law (2016), Human-Robot Interaction Zahedi et al. (2022), Sensor Pose Optimization Roveda et al. (2021), Robot Hockey Kaushik et al. (2022), Leveling System for Combine Harvesters Dettu et al. (2023) 

e.g., (Bobrinskoy et al., 2012; Marzat et al., 2011, 2012, 2013, 2010). Additionally, the optimization of percep-tion parameters dates back to at least (Hu and Kantor, 2017). In some cases, it may be desirable to obtain robust policy parameters in simulations . For example, one may want to obtain an initial robust starting point for safe or local online optimization (Yang et al., 2022b). Due to the model-plant mismatch between simulation and real-world, care needs to be taken not to overfit the policy to simulator dynamics. Instead, the policy shall be robust towards these uncertainties. In the easiest case, the optimization can be executed on different randomly generated seeds (Sorourifar et al., 2021; Stenger et al., 2022) and a robust constrained formulation can be used (see (12)) (Stenger et al., 2023a). More advanced approaches include verifying controllers against adversarial counter examples (Ghosh et al., 2018; Paulson et al., 2022) such as worst-case model-plant mismatch (Stenger, 2023; Stenger et al., 2020). BO can also be used for data-efficient domain randomization (Muratore et al., 2021). Alternatively, ro-

Page 22 of 37 D. Stenger et al. 

Table 3. BO paper with hardware experiments sorted with respect to advanced problem formulations 

Extensions References Vanilla BO (No Extensions), Sec. 5 (N = 57) Antonova et al. (2017, 2020); Bakaráˇ c et al. (2025); Bansal et al. (2017); Bellegarda et al. (2024); Blanchard et al. (2021); Calandra et al. (2014, 2016); Catenaro et al. (2025); Chen et al. (2019a, 2023); Cheng and Chen (2014); Culha et al. (2020); Daniel et al. (2014); Delgado-Guerrero et al. (2020b); Ding et al. (2018); Fröhlich Lukas P . et al. (2019); Galljamov et al. (2021); Guevara et al. (2017); Guzman et al. (2022); Hamaya et al. (2019); Hemker et al. (2009); Hose et al. (2025b); Jalas et al. (2021); Kavas et al. (2025); Kerimoglu et al. (2024); Khosravi et al. (2022); Kim et al. (2020); Kuindersma et al. (2012); Laferrière et al. (2020); Lechuz-Sierra et al. (2024); Li et al. (2022b); Lizotte et al. (2007); Marco et al. (2016); Matsubara et al. (2016); Neumann-Brosig et al. (2019); Pautrat et al. (2018); Röfer et al. (2024); Roveda et al. (2020a,b, 2021); Savaia et al. (2021); Shahrokhshahi et al. (2022); Shalloo et al. (2020); Sochopoulos et al. (2023); Tesch et al. (2011); von Rohr et al. (2018); Wang et al. (2025b); Wen et al. (2020); Yamawaki et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2022a); Yu et al. (2019); Zahedi et al. (2022); Zhai et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2023); Zhu et al. (2019); Zwane et al. (2024) Unknown Constraints, Sec. 6.1 ( N = 10) Dettu et al. (2023); Drieß et al. (2017); Duivenvoorden et al. (2017); Englert and Toussaint (2016); Khosravi et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023); Marco et al. (2021); von Rohr et al. (2024); Stenger (2023); Yu et al. (2022) Safe Exploration, Sec. 6.2 ( N = 16) Baumann et al. (2021); Berkenkamp et al. (2023, 2016); Holzapfel et al. (2024); Kaushik et al. (2022); Kirschner et al. (2019); König et al. (2025, 2021); König et al. (2023); Nishimura et al. (2017); Puigjaner et al. (2025); Wang et al. (2025a); Weber et al. (2021); Widmer et al. (2023); Wischnewski et al. (2019); Yang et al. (2022b) Crash Constraints, Sec. 6.3 ( N = 5) Gabler and Wollherr (2022); Kato et al. (2017); Marco et al. (2021); von Rohr et al. (2024); Stenger (2023) Multi-Objective, Sec. 6.4 (N = 7) Ariizumi et al. (2017); Chan et al. (2023); Hossen et al. (2025); Matteo et al. (2020); Okada et al. (2023); Tang et al. (2022); Tesch et al. (2013) Preferential, Sec. 6.5 (N = 3) Cosner et al. (2022); Gras et al. (2018); Thatte et al. (2017) Context, Sec. 6.6) (N = 9) Berkenkamp et al. (2023); Delgado-Guerrero et al. (2020a); Fröhlich et al. (2021); Fröhlich et al. (2022); König et al. (2021); Stenger (2023); Widmer et al. (2023); Yu et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2024) Time-Varying, Sec. 6.7) (N = 2) Holzapfel et al. (2024); König et al. (2025) Local, Sec. 6.9 ( N = 5) Fröhlich et al. (2021); He et al. (2025); Hose et al. (2025a); Park and Law (2016); von Rohr et al. (2024) Other Variants, Sec. 6.10 (N = 8) He et al. (2025); Junge et al. (2020); Kim et al. (2019); Marco et al. (2017); Nobar et al. (2024); Sasaki et al. (2020); Stenger et al. (2024); Tan et al. (2025) 

bustness can be increased by using formulations similar to multi-task BO (Groot et al., 2010; Toscano-Palmerin and Frazier, 2018), robustness towards uncertain input parameters is for example considered by Fröhlich et al. (2020), and a multi-objective problem trading off robust-ness and performance is formulated in (Matteo et al., 2020). 

## PA RT C: B E N C H M A R K I N G 

Systematic benchmarking has been central to progress in machine learning, computer vision, and robotics. It is particularly important for BO, where performance depends strongly on modeling assumptions, acquisi-tion functions, initialization strategies, hyperparameter fitting, and implementation details. In control and robotics, BO methods are often evaluated on individual case studies. While such demonstrations are valuable, they make it difficult to assess whether a method gener-alizes beyond a specific task or whether its performance depends on favorable design choices. Part C discusses how BO methods for control and robotics can be benchmarked more systematically. Sec-tion 8 summarizes recommended problem classes, baselines, metrics, and statistical analyses. A recurring difficulty is the limited availability of realistic, public controller-tuning benchmarks. To make the discussion concrete, we provide a small code template, T U N E CO N -

T R O L (§), which currently contains 34 variants of the popular cart pole and cascaded tank tasks and illustrates how such tasks can be shared in a reproducible format. Section 9 then demonstrates a minimal benchmark com-paring common acquisition functions on one of those tasks. 

## 8 Best Practices in Benchmarking Black-Box Optimization Algorithms 

Benchmarking BO methods requires four main choices: (i) benchmark problems, (ii) baseline algorithms, (iii) performance metrics, and (iv) statistical analysis. Al-gorithm benchmarking is itself an active research area (Bartz-Beielstein et al., 2020; Beiranvand et al., 2017; 

Page 23 of 37 D. Stenger et al. 

Willemsen et al., 2024). We therefore do not attempt to provide a complete treatment, but instead summarize BO-oriented best practices that are particularly relevant for control and robotics. We focus on vanilla BO, i.e., single-objective uncon-strained BO, as introduced in Secs. 3.2 and 5. The same general principles also apply to the advanced BO variants discussed in Sec. 6, but the metrics and baselines must then be adapted to the respective setting, such as con-straints, safety, multiple objectives, contextual variables, or multi-fidelity evaluations. 

Key Messages 

Typical benchmark problem categories range from GP-samples and synthetic test functions to application-oriented simulation environments (Sec. 8.1). Baselines (Sec. 8.2) should at minimum include Sobol sampling. Other black-box optimiza-tion frameworks are often informative comparators. The most common BO performance metric is re-gret. However, regret cannot be easily calculated when departing from simple benchmark problems, where the true optimum is known (Sec. 8.3). Fi-nally, careful statistical analysis is crucial when benchmarking across different seeds and objective functions (Sec. 8.4). The following checklist serves as practical guideline for reporting benchmarking results: 

❑ Task, search space and evaluation budget 

❑ Number of seeds and repetitions 

❑ Initial design and sampling strategy 

❑ Surrogate model (kernel, likelihood, hyperpri-ors) 

❑ Acquisition function and all hyperparameters 

❑ Baselines and all hyperparameters 

❑ Evaluation metric (online curve + final metric) 

❑ Overhead /runtime reporting 

❑ Statistical test 

❑ (for control problems) check state trajectories 

8.1 Benchmark Problems Categories 

Evaluating a BO method on a single objective function is rarely sufficient. The chosen objective may acciden-tally match the assumptions of one method, for exam-ple its kernel, smoothness assumptions, or exploration strategy. Reliable evidence therefore requires benchmark problems that cover different structures, noise levels, di-mensionalities, and degrees of model mismatch. We distinguish three broad categories of benchmark problems: GP-sample objectives, synthetic analytic test functions, and application-oriented simulation or hard-ware tasks. GP-sample objectives can further be used for within-model or out-of-model comparisons. Across all categories, benchmark results should be reported over multiple random seeds, preferably with shared initial de-signs across methods. Hyperparameters should be cho-sen using a procedure that does not leak information from the final test instances into the evaluation. 

GP Samples. GP samples are functions drawn from the distribution over functions that is defined by a GP prior. They are especially common in the machine learning lit-erature because they make it easy to generate many test functions with controlled properties, such as smoothness, length scales, and observation noise. One practical way to generate analytic GP samples is given by Wilson et al. (2020). 1

GP samples are useful for studying BO behavior un-der controlled assumptions. In a within-model compari-son , the GP prior used by BO matches the GP prior from which the objective functions are sampled. The kernel class, length scales, observation noise, and other prior assumptions are therefore known to the optimizer. This setting represents an idealized case for BO. It is useful for isolating the effect of acquisition functions because it largely removes model mismatch and hyperparameter uncertainty. In an out-of-model comparison , the objective is still sam-pled from a GP , but the optimizer does not receive the generating hyperparameters. Instead, it must infer them online. The objective may still lie within the assumed model class (e.g., correct kernel class), but uncertainty in hyperparameters better reflects practical use. 

Synthetic Test Functions. Synthetic benchmarks pro-vide fast-to-evaluate objectives with known analytic form. A prominent example is the COCO benchmark (Hansen et al., 2021). Their main advantage is that the global optimum is often known, enabling regret-based evaluation. Moreover, synthetic functions can be cho-sen to emphasize specific challenges (e.g., many local optima in Ackley; narrow valleys in Rosenbrock). 2

Synthetic functions are useful for controlled exper-iments, debugging, and comparing methods under known difficulty patterns. However, they may not capture the structure of controller-tuning or robotics problems. Therefore, they should not be the only evidence for claims about BO in control and robotics. 

Realistic Controller Tuning and Robotics Tasks. Ap-plication-oriented benchmarks are closest to the settings in which BO is ultimately used. They may be based on hardware experiments, experimentally validated simula-tions, or simplified but representative simulation environ-ments. Ideally, such benchmarks should specify the con-troller structure, parameter bounds, objective function, noise sources, failure handling, evaluation budget, and software interface. Compared with machine learning and AutoML, where many public benchmark suites are available (e.g., JAHS-Bench-201 (Bansal et al., 2022), HPOBench (Eggensperger et al., 2021)), realistic public bench-marks for controller tuning and robotics remain less common (Zhou et al., 2024). This limits comparability between BO methods and makes it harder to identify robust default settings. To lower the barrier to sharing 

> 1Available in BoTorch.
> 2For an overview of common test functions, see this collection. Page 24 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

controller-tuning and robotics benchmarks, we provide TU N E CO N T R O L (§): a lightweight benchmark suite for black-box controller tuning. 

TuneControl: A lightweight benchmark for black-box controller tuning. open in §

TuneControl provides reproducible controller-tuning tasks with a consistent API. It currently includes 34 variants of the popular cart pole and cascaded tank tasks. TuneControl is easily extensible, and we invite the community to contribute additional tuning tasks. 

8.2 Baselines 

Baselines serve two roles. First, they calibrate the diffi-culty of the benchmark task. Second, they show whether the modeling overhead of BO is justified. At minimum, BO benchmarks should include Sobol sampling. Sobol sampling is a space-filling non-model-based baseline and is usually stronger than i.i.d. random search for low-dimensional bounded domains. For larger evaluation budgets, it is useful to include low-overhead global optimizers such as CMA-ES (Pitra et al., 2016), pattern search, or particle swarm optimiza-tion. These methods do not build probabilistic surrogate models and can therefore be competitive when function evaluations are cheap relative to BO overhead. Including such baselines helps determine whether BO is actually needed for the considered budget regime. Comparing against response surface based optimiza-tion can also be informative. Examples include BADS (Acerbi and Ma, 2017), GLIS (Bemporad, 2020), and SMGO (Sabug Jr et al., 2021). These methods are rarely included in BO comparisons, although they may achieve similar sample efficiency in some black-box optimization settings. Baseline hyperparameters should be treated as care-fully as the hyperparameters of the proposed BO method. If the proposed method is tuned for the benchmark, then the baselines should receive comparable tuning effort. Otherwise, the comparison may overstate the advan-tage of the proposed method. In addition to external baselines, ablation studies are often useful. They com-pare variants of the proposed algorithm and showcase which components are responsible for performance improvements. 

8.3 Performance Metrics 

The choice of the performance metric depends on what is observable and what is known about the objective. When the global optimum and the latent noise-free objective are available (e.g., synthetic functions), regret provides a standard notion of sample efficiency. When they are not available (e.g., hardware or realistic simu-lators), observed-cost and runtime are useful metrics for performance evaluation. One common BO performance metric is simple regret .It quantifies the sub-optimality of the parameters sug-gested by an optimization algorithm after a given bud-get k:

rk = ¯J(ˆθ k) − ¯J∗, (22) where ˆθ k is the recommendation after k evaluations, ¯ J is the latent noise-free objective function evaluated at the location of the estimated best parameter value ˆθ k (see Sec. 5.3), and ¯ J∗ is the global optimum. Simple regret is relevant when the cost incurred during optimization is not important and only the final recommendation mat-ters. In contrast, cumulative regret measures the cost accu-mulated during optimization; this is the sum of the so-called instantaneous regret: 

Rk =

> k

X

> κ=1

  ¯J(θκ) − ¯J∗. (23) Cumulative regret considers the cost encountered over the whole optimization. Cumulative regret is relevant if parameters are tuned online, e.g., in a productive pro-duction environment, whereas simple regret is relevant when the cost encountered during optimization is not of interest. To practically calculate regret , the true optimum of the objective function has to be known. This is only the case for synthetic functions that can be optimized glob-ally (see Sec. 8.1). For all other functions, the global optimum needs to be estimated in different ways e.g., by gridding, or taking the best result achieved by any algo-rithm on any seed. Additionally, the latent, noise-free objective function ¯ J has to be known. This is only the case, if the noise is added artificially after calculating ¯ J,for example in GP-samples or synthetic functions. A more practical alternative to regret is to use the ex-pected cost of the optimum parameters at each iteration ¯J(ˆθ κ). However, this is only possible in benchmarks where ¯ J is known, e.g., in GP-samples or synthetic func-tions. In particular, it is not known when evaluating on hardware or noisy simulations. In those cases ¯ J(ˆθ κ) may have to be estimated from multiple samples. When regret and ¯ J(ˆθ κ) is unavailable, a common fall-back is to summarize the observed objective values. How-ever, different summaries have different failure modes: Just reporting the lowest observed cost min κ∈{ 1,..., k} Jκ has to be treated with caution especially in high-noise cases because it is prone to outliers. In contrast the cumulative observed cost Pk 

> κ=1

Jκ is a practical and sound alternative to the cumulative regret as it accurately describes the cost created during opti-mization. Another key metric that should always be included in BO algorithm benchmarking is the wall clock time or over-head produced by BO. The computation time is key to evaluate in which circumstances the particular BO algo-rithm is practical. For control and robotics benchmarks, scalar perfor-mance metrics alone can be insufficient to verify that an optimized controller behaves as intended. We therefore recommend reporting behavioral diagnostics such as state trajectories alongside the primary optimization 

> Page 25 of 37 D. Stenger et al.

metrics. Behavioral diagnostics are not intended to replace the primary scalar objective, but to increase interpretability and ensure that reported improvements correspond to qualitatively reasonable closed-loop be-havior. Extensions of BO require metrics aligned with the extension: When looking beyond single objective opti-mization (Sec. 6) metrics specific to each use case have to be used. For example a popular metric for multi-objective optimization is the hypervolume indicator (Guerreiro et al., 2021) with alternatives presented in the overview paper (Riquelme et al., 2015). When con-straints or safety limits exist, additional metrics such as the number of constraint violations can be informative. 

8.4 Statistical Analysis 

Meaningful algorithm comparisons require repeated evaluations. At minimum, each method should be eval-uated over multiple random seeds. Whenever possible, methods should also be tested on multiple objective functions, task instances, or initial conditions. For fair comparisons, different methods should use the same random seeds and the same initial designs when appli-cable. For a fixed task, we recommend reporting the median and interquartile range across seeds. BO performance distributions are often skewed and heavy-tailed, so the mean and standard deviation can be misleading when reported alone. Means and standard deviations may still be useful as supplementary summaries, especially when they are required by a specific reporting convention. Statistical tests can help assess whether observed dif-ferences are likely to be meaningful. Choosing a statisti-cal test is an active research field (Carrasco et al., 2020; Demšar, 2006; Derrac et al., 2011), we only suggest one variant. For pairwise comparisons with matched seeds or task instances, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test is a com-mon non-parametric option (Wilcoxon, 1945). It should not be confused with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, which is used for unpaired samples. For comparisons involv-ing more than two algorithms, a Friedman test can first be used to test whether at least one method differs from the others. If post-hoc pairwise tests are then performed, multiple-comparison corrections such as Holm’s proce-dure should be applied (Garcia and Herrera, 2008; Holm, 1979). Aggregating results across different objective functions is more difficult because objective values can have dif-ferent scales. Directly averaging costs or regrets across tasks may therefore be misleading. Common alternatives include ranking methods per task, reporting the fraction of solved target values, or normalizing performance rel-ative to a common baseline (Hansen et al., 2021). 

## 9 Example Benchmark 

We now illustrate the previous recommendations using a small benchmark on a cart-pole swing-up task. The benchmark compares three common acquisition func-tions, expected improvement (EI), upper confidence                                        

> Table 4. Experimental setup, surrogate model, acquisition func-tions, and baseline.
> Item Details Experimental setup
> Task Cart-pole swing-up Bounds [−3.4, −2.0 ]×[−8.0, −4.0 ]
> ×[−50.0, −30.0 ]×[−10.0, −2.5 ]
> BO bounds [0, 1 ]4
> Budget 40 evaluations Seeds 20 per method Initial design Sobol; 5 initial points
> Surrogate model
> Kernel Matérn ν=5/2Mean Zero mean Hyperparameters ARD in 4D Initial lengthscale p4Lengthscale constraint [0.005, 4.0 ]
> Likelihood Gaussian Fit MAP Noise constraint [10 −5, 10 −1]
> Noise fit MLL
> Acquisition functions /baseline
> LogEI No additional hyperparameter UCB β=2.0 MES Candidate set size c=1000 Sobol No surrogate

bound (UCB), and max-value entropy search (MES), against Sobol sampling. All BO variants use the same GP surrogate model and differ only in the acquisition function. The example addresses the following question: under a fixed GP model and without task-specific acquisition-function tuning, how much does the acquisition function affect performance on this controller-tuning task? The goal is not to determine which acquisition function is gen-erally superior. Instead, the example provides a template for reporting a minimal BO benchmark in a truly black-box setting. 

Key Messages 

This section illustrates the benchmarking recommen-dations from Sec. 8 by comparing BoTorch imple-mentations of three acquisition functions on a four-dimensional cart-pole controller-tuning task. The example is intentionally small. Its purpose is not to identify the best acquisition function in general, but to demonstrate how a minimal, reproducible BO benchmark can be reported. 

9.1 Benchmark Setup 

Table 4 summarizes the experimental setup. The con-troller has four tunable parameters. BO operates in a normalized input space [0, 1 ]4, while the task evaluates the corresponding parameters in the original controller bounds. The observed objective values are standardized within each BO run before fitting the GP model. All BO variants use the same surrogate model: a zero-mean GP with a Matérn-5 /2 kernel, automatic relevance determination, Gaussian likelihood, and MAP hyperpa-rameter fitting. The only difference between the BO vari- 

> Page 26 of 37 D. Stenger et al.
> Table 5.

Final performance of the recommended controller. The bold value indicates the best method. Underlined values are not significantly worse than the best method under the chosen post-hoc test. The runtime row reports the average wall-clock time for one complete optimization run including simulation time.             

> Method Sobol LogEI MES UCB Med. ±IQR 4647 ±190 4310 ±48 4321 ±165 4357 ±250 Runtime (s) 16 31 57 31

ants is the acquisition function. We use BoTorch’s default implementations of LogEI, UCB, and MES with the hyper-parameters listed in Table 4. Sobol sampling serves as the non-model-based baseline. We use d + 1 initial Sobol samples, where d = 4 is the search-space dimension, followed by a total budget of 10 d = 40 evaluations. This represents a low-budget tun-ing regime, which is typical for expensive controller eval-uations. To emulate a black-box setting, no acquisition-function hyperparameters are tuned specifically for the cart-pole task. The main online metric is the best ob-served cost after each iteration, min 

> κ∈{ 1,..., k}

Jκ. (24) For statistical analysis, we use 20 seeds per method. For the online best-observed cost, we report the median and the 25% and 75% quantiles. For the final recom-mended controllers, we first apply a Friedman test across all methods. If the null hypothesis is rejected, we com-pare the best-performing method against the remaining methods using paired two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Holm–Bonferroni correction. 

9.2 Results and Conclusion 

Figure 6 shows the behavior of the optimization algo-rithms. The BO variants improve faster than Sobol sam-pling on this task. Among the tested methods, LogEI achieves the lowest final median cost. Table 5 summarizes the final performance. The Fried-man test indicates that at least one method differs sig-nificantly from the others. In the post-hoc comparison, LogEI performs significantly better than Sobol sampling. However, the differences between LogEI and the other BO acquisition functions are not statistically significant under the chosen test. Thus, the results should not be interpreted as evidence that LogEI is generally superior to UCB or MES. Finally, Figure 7 shows the state trajectories of one op-timization run for LogEI for the median performance. This minimal benchmark supports two conclusions. First, BO can outperform Sobol sampling on this cart-pole tuning task under a small evaluation budget. Second, the choice of acquisition function does not significantly influence performance in this specific case. This motivates broader benchmarking across multiple controller tuning and robotics tasks. 0 10 20 30 40 Iteration 4250 4500 4750 5000 5250 5500 5750 6000 Best observed objective LogEI MES Sobol UCB  

> Figure 6.

Best observed cost over the optimization budget for the cart-pole benchmark. Lines show the median over seeds; shaded regions show the 25% and 75% quantiles. −3       

> −2
> −10123Cart position  x1
> Reference Initial parameter Best parameter 0510 15 20 25 30 Time (s)
> −10
> −50510 Control input  u
> Figure 7.

State trajectories of one optimization run with the LogEI acquisition function. 

## 10 Future Research Directions 

Bayesian optimization has become a widely used tool for learning in control and robotics, but substantial opportu-nities remain for future research. 

Benchmarking. Section 4 reviews the types of prob-lems for which BO is particularly well suited, yet rigorous empirical comparisons with other learning and optimiza-tion paradigms remain scarce. For instance, the sample efficiency of BO should be systematically compared with that of other learning-based control approaches, such as model-based reinforcement learning. Similarly, compar-isons between BO and other surrogate-based black-box optimization methods are lacking. Section 5 highlights key design choices in vanilla 

> Page 27 of 37

D. Stenger et al. 

BO. While GPs dominate as surrogate models in the BO for control and robotics literature, other domains commonly rely on alternatives such as random forests or tree-structured Parzen estimators. Another promising alternative are neural network models such as VBLLs. More comprehensive benchmarking across a broader range of controller-tuning and robot-learning tasks is needed to determine which surrogate models are most appropriate in this setting. The same holds for GP mod-eling decisions, including kernel choice, mean function, likelihood, and hyperparameter treatment. Moreover, as discussed in Sec. 8, realistic benchmarks for control and robotics learning remain limited. To this end, we provide a lightweight benchmarking framework TU N E CO N T R O L (§) and present an example in Sec. 9. With this, we hope to encourage the community to contribute their own benchmark problems to T U N E CO N -

T R O L . This shall allow our community to evaluate BO design choices for control and robotics more rigorously, and thus increase visibility and impact of BO research. 

Methods. The last decade has seen substantial ad-vances in BO methods, as this paper surveys. Some of those methods have seen many successful applications ranging from lab-scale demonstrators to industry scale problems. Still, there is large potential for advance-ments, partly driven by open problems and partly by new opportunities from ML. We outline some examples below: Safe BO (Sec. 6.2) is a prominent BO research direc-tion. However, most hardware applications use fixed GP-hyperparameters and specific values for β. An impor-tant step in safe BO research would be to show in a use case beyond lab-scale demonstrators how those parame-ters can be determined prior to optimization. Addition-ally, further developing a common understanding and categorizing different notions of safety , e.g., determinis-tic /stochastic guarantees, cautious exploration, etc., and their practical requirements would help to bridge the gap between methods development and application. At this point BO is largely bound to the strict episodic setting mostly limiting its application to highly repetitive tasks. Contextual, time-varying and early-stopping BO provide promising mechanisms to relax this assumption, but further research is needed to transfer BO’s strong sample efficiency to settings that are less repetitive and more dynamic. Recent work has explored several approaches to com-bining BO with foundation-model paradigms, including large language models and prior-fitted networks. Al-though applications in control and robotics remain limited, this line of research is highly relevant to these fields, as it offers a way to integrate priors learned from large-scale data sources with the sparse, task-specific data available during optimization. Finally, combining BO with ideas from other learning-based control methods, as well as with alternative black-box optimization paradigms, remains a promising avenue with significant potential for methodological and practical advances. 

## Declaration of generative AI in the manuscript preparation process. 

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used various LLMs to assist with code generation and cor-rection of grammar and spelling. After using each tool /service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

## References 

Abbasi-Yadkori, Y., 2013. Online Learning for Linearly Parametrized Control Problems. Phd thesis. University of Alberta. Acerbi, L., Ma, W.J., 2017. Practical Bayesian optimization for model fitting with Bayesian adaptive direct search, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc. Agnihotri, A., Batra, N., 2020. Exploring Bayesian optimization. Distill 5, e26. Agrawal, S., Goyal, N., 2013. Thompson sampling for contextual ban-dits with linear payoffs, in: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. pp. 127–135. Agrell, C., 2019. Gaussian processes with linear operator inequality constraints. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20, 1–36. Alonso, M., Philipp, H., Stefan, S., Sebastian, T., 2017. On the design of LQR kernels for efficient controller learning, in: 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 5193–5200. Ament, S., Daulton, S., Eriksson, D., Balandat, M., Bakshy, E., 2023. Unexpected improvements to expected improvement for Bayesian optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems, pp. 20577–20612. Annaswamy, A.M., Fradkov, A.L., 2021. A historical perspective of adap-tive control and learning. Annual Reviews in Control 52, 18–41. Antonova, R., Rai, A., Atkeson, C.G., 2017. Deep kernels for optimizing locomotion controllers, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 47–56. Antonova, R., Rai, A., Li, T., Kragic, D., 2020. bayesian optimization in variational latent spaces with dynamic compression, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 456–465. Ariizumi, R., Tesch, M., Kato, K., Choset, H., Matsuno, F., 2017. Multi-objective optimization based on expensive robotic experiments un-der heteroscedastic noise. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33, 468– 483. Artale, V ., L. R. Milazzo, C., Orlando, C., Ricciardello, A., 2017. Com-parison of GA and PSO approaches for the direct and LQR tuning of a multirotor PD controller. Journal of Industrial & Management Optimization 13, 2067–2091. Astudillo, R., Frazier, P .I., 2021. Thinking inside the box: A tutorial on grey-box Bayesian optimization, in: 2021 Winter Simulation Confer-ence (WSC), pp. 1–15. Astudillo, R., Lin, Z., Bakshy, E., Frazier, P .I., 2023. qeubo: A decision-theoretic acquisition function for preferential Bayesian optimization, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 25-27 April 2023, Palau de Congressos, Valencia, Spain, PMLR. pp. 1093–1114. Auer, P ., 2002. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, 397–422. Baheri, A., Vermillion, C., 2019. Combined Plant and Controller Design Using Batch Bayesian Optimization: A Case Study in Airborne Wind Energy Systems. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control 141, 091013. Bai, T., Li, Y., Shen, Y., Zhang, X., Zhang, W., Cui, B., 2023. Trans-fer learning for Bayesian optimization: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05927 . Bakaráˇ c, P ., Pavloviˇ cová, E., Klauˇ co, M., Oravec, J., 2025. bayesian optimization-based tunable explicit mpc on a pocket-sized embed-ded platform, in: 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Con-trol (CDC), IEEE. pp. 4663–4670. Page 28 of 37 D. Stenger et al. Balandat, M., Karrer, B., Jiang, D.R., Daulton, S., Letham, B., Wilson, A.G., Bakshy, E., 2020. BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian Optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33. Bansal, A., Stoll, D., Janowski, M., Zela, A., Hutter, F., 2022. Jahs-bench-201: A foundation for research on joint architecture and hy-perparameter search. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 38788–38802. Bansal, S., Calandra, R., Xiao, T., Levine, S., Tomiin, C.J., 2017. Goal-driven dynamics learning via Bayesian optimization, in: 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE. pp. 5168–5173. Baptista, R., Poloczek, M., 2018. bayesian optimization of combinato-rial structures, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. Bardou, A., Thiran, P ., Ranieri, G., 2024. This too shall pass: Removing stale observations in dynamic bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 42696–42737. Bartz-Beielstein, T., Doerr, C., Berg, D.v.d., Bossek, J., Chandrasekaran, S., Eftimov, T., Fischbach, A., Kerschke, P ., La Cava, W., Lopez-Ibanez, M., et al., 2020. Benchmarking in optimization: Best practice and open issues. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03488 . Baumann, D., Marco, A., Turchetta, M., Trimpe, S., 2021. Gosafe: Glob-ally optimal safe robot learning, in: 2021 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 4452–4458. Beiranvand, V ., Hare, W., Lucet, Y., 2017. Best practices for comparing optimization algorithms. Optimization and Engineering 18, 815– 848. Bellegarda, G., Shafiee, M., Özberk, M.E., Ijspeert, A., 2024. Quadruped-frog: Rapid online optimization of continuous quadruped jumping, in: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 1443–1450. Bemporad, A., 2020. Global optimization via inverse distance weight-ing and radial basis functions. Computational Optimization and Ap-plications 77, 571–595. Bemporad, A., Piga, D., 2019. Active preference learning based on radial basis functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13049 . Benjamins, C., Raponi, E., Jankovic, A., van der Blom, K., Santoni, M.L., Lindauer, M., Doerr, C., 2022. Pi is back! switching acquisition functions in Bayesian optimization, in: 2022 NeurIPS Workshop on Gaussian Processes, Spatiotemporal Modeling, and Decision-making Systems. Berkenkamp, F., Krause, A., Schoellig, A.P ., 2023. bayesian optimiza-tion with safety constraints: Safe and automatic parameter tuning in robotics. Machine Learning 112, 3713–3747. Berkenkamp, F., Schoellig, A.P ., Krause, A., 2016. Safe controller op-timization for quadrotors with Gaussian processes, in: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 491–496. Berkenkamp, F., Schoellig, A.P ., Krause, A., 2019. No-regret Bayesian optimization with unknown hyperparameters. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20, 1–24. Bertipaglia, A., Shyrokau, B., Alirezaei, M., Happee, R., 2022. A two-stage Bayesian optimisation for automatic tuning of an unscented Kalman filter for vehicle sideslip angle estimation, in: 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), IEEE. pp. 670–677. Bhattacharya, A., Vasisht, S., Adetola, V ., Huang, S., Sharma, H., Vrabie, D.L., 2021. Control co-design of commercial building chiller plant using Bayesian optimization. Energy and Buildings 246, 111077. Bjelonic, F., Lee, J., Arm, P ., Sako, D., Tateo, D., Peters, J., Hutter, M., 2023. Learning-based design and control for quadrupedal robots with parallel-elastic actuators. IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-ters 8, 1611–1618. Blanchard, A.B., Cornejo Maceda, G.Y., Fan, D., Li, Y., Zhou, Y., Noack, B.R., Sapsis, T.P ., 2021. bayesian optimization for active flow control. Acta Mechanica Sinica , 1–13. Bliek, L., Guijt, A., Karlsson, R., Verwer, S., de Weerdt, M., 2023. Benchmarking surrogate-based optimisation algorithms on expen-sive black-box functions. Applied Soft Computing 147, 110744. Bobrinskoy, A., Gatti, M., Guerineau, O., Cazaurang, F., Bluteau, B., Recherche, E., 2012. Model-based fault detection and isolation de-sign for flight-critical actuators in a harsh environment, in: 2012 IEEE /AIAA 31st Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), pp. 7D5–1–7D5–8. Bogunovic, I., Scarlett, J., Cevher, V ., 2016. Time-varying Gaussian process bandit optimization, in: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 314–323. Bradford, E., Schweidtmann, A.M., Lapkin, A., 2018. Efficient multi-objective optimization employing Gaussian processes, spectral sam-pling and a genetic algorithm. Journal of Global Optimization 71, 407–438. Bristow, D.A., Tharayil, M., Alleyne, A.G., 2006. A survey of iterative learning control. IEEE Control Systems Magazine 26, 96–114. Brochu, E., Cora, V .M., De Freitas, N., 2010. A tutorial on Bayesian opti-mization of expensive cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599 . Brunzema, P ., Jordahn, M., Willes, J., Trimpe, S., Snoek, J., Harrison, J., 2025a. Bayesian optimization via continual variational last layer training, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Brunzema, P ., von Rohr, A., Solowjow, F., Trimpe, S., 2025b. Event-triggered time-varying bayesian optimization. Transactions on Ma-chine Learning Research . Brunzema, P ., Tiao, L., Le, N., De Angeli, K., Xuan, Y., Gligorijevic, D., 2026. Agentic Bayesian optimization through surrogate-augmented autoresearch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.00316 . Brunzema, P ., Trimpe, S., 2025. BayeSQP: bayesian optimization through sequential quadratic programming, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). Brunzema, P ., Von Rohr, A., Trimpe, S., 2022. On controller tuning with time-varying Bayesian optimization, in: 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 4046–4052. Calandra, R., Gopalan, N., Seyfarth, A., Peters, J., Deisenroth, M.P ., 2014. bayesian gait optimization for bipedal locomotion, in: Parda-los, P .M., Resende, M.G., Vogiatzis, C., Walteros, J.L. (Eds.), Learn-ing and Intelligent Optimization, Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 274–290. Calandra, R., Seyfarth, A., Peters, J., Deisenroth, M.P ., 2016. bayesian optimization for learning gaits under uncertainty. Annals of Mathe-matics and Artificial Intelligence 76, 5–23. Campagna, G., Lagomarsino, M., Lorenzini, M., Chrysostomou, D., Rehm, M., Ajoudani, A., 2024. Promoting trust in industrial human-robot collaboration through preference-based optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 9, 9255–9262. Campi, M., Lecchini, A., Savaresi, S., 2002. Virtual reference feedback tuning: a direct method for the design of feedback controllers. Au-tomatica 38, 1337–1346. Candelieri, A., 2021. A gentle introduction to Bayesian optimization, in: 2021 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 1–16. Carrasco, J., García, S., Rueda, M.M., Das, S., Herrera, F., 2020. Recent trends in the use of statistical tests for comparing swarm and evo-lutionary computing algorithms: Practical guidelines and a critical review. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 54, 100665. Catenaro, E., Sabug, L., Panzani, G., Sette, D., Ruiz, F., Fagiano, L., Savaresi, S.M., 2025. Automatic learning-based calibration of as-sisted motorcycle gearshift: A comparative study. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology . Chakrabarty, A., 2022. Optimizing closed-loop performance with data from similar systems: A Bayesian meta-learning approach, in: 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE. pp. 130– 136. Chakrabarty, A., Benosman, M., 2021. Safe learning-based observers for unknown nonlinear systems using Bayesian optimization. Auto-matica 133, 109860. Chakrabarty, A., Burns, D.J., Guay, M., Laughman, C.R., 2022a. Ex-tremum seeking controller tuning for heat pump optimization us-ing failure-robust Bayesian optimization. Journal of Process Control 120, 86–96. Chakrabarty, A., Burns, D.J., Guay, M., Laughman, C.R., 2022b. Ex-tremum seeking controller tuning for heat pump optimization us-ing failure-robust Bayesian optimization. Journal of Process Control Page 29 of 37 D. Stenger et al. 120, 86–96. Chan, K.J., Makrygiorgos, G., Mesbah, A., 2023. Towards personalized plasma medicine via data-efficient adaptation of fast deep learning-based mpc policies . Chan, K.J., Paulson, J.A., Mesbah, A., 2024. A practical multiobjec-tive learning framework for optimal hardware-software co-design of control-on-a-chip systems. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 32, 2178–2193. Chao, O., Weixing, L., 2006. Comparison between pso and ga for pa-rameters optimization of pid controller, in: 2006 International Con-ference on Mechatronics and Automation, pp. 2471–2475. Char, I., Chung, Y., Neiswanger, W., Kandasamy, K., Nelson, A.O., Boyer, M., Kolemen, E., Schneider, J., 2019. Offline contextual Bayesian op-timization, in: Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc. Chatzilygeroudis, K., Vassiliades, V ., Stulp, F., Calinon, S., Mouret, J.B., 2020a. A survey on policy search algorithms for learning robot con-trollers in a handful of trials. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 36, 328–347. Chatzilygeroudis, K., Vassiliades, V ., Stulp, F., Calinon, S., Mouret, J.B., 2020b. A survey on policy search algorithms for learning robot con-trollers in a handful of trials: Ieee transactions on robotics, 1-20 . Che, M., Tseng, T.Y., Eimer-Rüegg, T., Lindauer, M., {von Rohr }, A., 2026. Efficient heteroscedastic Bayesian optimization for risk-aware autoRL, in: Reinforcement Learning Conference. Chen, H., Bowels, S., Zhang, B., Fuhlbrigge, T., 2019a. Controller pa-rameter optimization for complex industrial system with uncertain-ties. Measurement and Control 52, 888–895. Chen, J., Deng, L., Hua, Z., Ying, W., Zhao, J., 2023. bayesian optimization-based efficient impedance controller tuning for robotic interaction with force feedback. IEEE Transactions on Instrumenta-tion and Measurement 72, 1–10. Chen, Z., Ahmed, N., Julier, S., Heckman, C., 2019b. Kalman filter tuning with Bayesian optimization . Chen, Z., Biggie, H., Ahmed, N., Julier, S., Heckman, C., 2024. Kalman filter auto-tuning with consistent and robust Bayesian optimization. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 60, 2236– 2250. Chen, Z., Heckman, C., Julier, S., Ahmed, N., 2018. Weak in the nees?: Auto-tuning kalman filters with Bayesian optimization, in: 2018 21st International Conference on Information Fusion (FU-SION), IEEE. pp. 1072–1079. Cheng, H., Chen, H., 2014. Online parameter optimization in robotic force controlled assembly processes, in: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 3465– 3470. Cho, K., Shao, K., Mesbah, A., 2024. Run-indexed time-varying bayesian optimization with positional encoding for auto-tuning of controllers: Application to a plasma-assisted deposition process with run-to-run drifts. Computers & Chemical Engineering 185, 108653. Chowdhury, S.R., Gopalan, A., 2017. On kernelized multi-armed ban-dits, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. pp. 844–853. Chung, Y., Char, I., Neiswanger, W., Kandasamy, K., Nelson, A.O., Boyer, M.D., Kolemen, E., Schneider, J., 2020. Offline contextual Bayesian optimization for nuclear fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01793 . Cissé, A., Evangelopoulos, X., Gusev, V .V ., Cooper, A.I., 2025. Language-based Bayesian optimization research assistant (BORA), in: Kwok, J. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-25, International Joint Con-ferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. pp. 4967–4975. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2025/553 .Cosner, R., Tucker, M., Taylor, A., Li, K., Molnar, T., Ubelacker, W., Alan, A., Orosz, G., Yue, Y., Ames, A., 2022. Safety-aware preference-based learning for safety-critical control, in: Firoozi, R., Mehr, N., Yel, E., Antonova, R., Bohg, J., Schwager, M., Kochenderfer, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 4th Annual Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, PMLR. pp. 1020–1033. Coulson, J., Lygeros, J., Dörfler, F., 2019. Data-enabled predictive con-trol: In the shallows of the deepc, in: 2019 18th European Control Conference (ECC), pp. 307–312. Coutinho, J.P ., Castillo, I., Reis, M.S., 2024. Human-in-the-loop con-troller tuning using preferential Bayesian optimization . Csomay-Shanklin, N., Tucker, M., Dai, M., Reher, J., Ames, A.D., 2022. Learning controller gains on bipedal walking robots via user prefer-ences, in: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 10405–10411. Culha, U., Demir, S.O., Trimpe, S., Sitti, M., 2020. Learning of sub-optimal gait controllers for magnetic walking soft millirobots. Robotics science and systems: online proceedings 2020, 70. Dadkhahi, H., Rios, J., Shanmugam, K., Das, P ., 2022. Fourier repre-sentations for black-box optimization over categorical variables, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Daniel, C., Viering, M., Metz, J., Kroemer, O., Peters, J., 2014. Active reward learning, in: Robotics: Science and systems. Daulton, S., Wan, X., Eriksson, D., Balandat, M., Osborne, M.A., Bakshy, E., 2022. bayesian optimization over discrete and mixed spaces via probabilistic reparameterization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Deisenroth, M., Rasmussen, C.E., 2011. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy search, in: Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pp. 465–472. Deisenroth, M.P ., 2011. A survey on policy search for robotics. Founda-tions and Trends in Robotics 2, 1–142. Deisenroth, M.P ., Fox, D., Rasmussen, C.E., 2013. Gaussian processes for data-efficient learning in robotics and control. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 37, 408–423. Delcaro, G., Menn, J., Stenger, D., Savaresi, S.M., Trimpe, S., For-mentin, S., 2026. Twin-in-the-loop observer tuning via gradient-information Bayesian optimization with line search. Control Engi-neering Practice 172, 106891. Delgado-Guerrero, J.A., Colomé, A., Torras, C., 2020a. Contextual pol-icy search for micro-data robot motion learning through covariate Gaussian process latent variable models, in: 2020 IEEE /RSJ Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 5511–5517. Delgado-Guerrero, J.A., Colomé, A., Torras, C., 2020b. Sample-efficient robot motion learning using Gaussian process latent variable models, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 314–320. Demšar, J., 2006. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine learning research 7, 1–30. Deneault, J.R., Kim, W., Kim, J., Gu, Y., Chang, J., Maruyama, B., Myung, J.I., Pitt, M.A., 2025. Preferential Bayesian optimization improves the efficiency of printing objects with subjective qualities. Digital Discovery 4, 723–737. Deng, Y., Zhou, X., Kim, B., Tewari, A., Gupta, A., Shroff, N., 2022. Weighted Gaussian process bandits for non-stationary environments, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR. pp. 6909–6932. Derrac, J., García, S., Molina, D., Herrera, F., 2011. A practical tutorial on the use of nonparametric statistical tests as a methodology for comparing evolutionary and swarm intelligence algorithms. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 1, 3–18. Deshwal, A., Ament, S., Balandat, M., Bakshy, E., Doppa, J.R., Eriks-son, D., 2023. bayesian optimization over high-dimensional combi-natorial spaces via dictionary-based embeddings, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR. Deshwal, A., Belakaria, S., Doppa, J.R., 2021. bayesian optimization over hybrid spaces, in: International Conference on Machine Learn-ing, PMLR. Dettu, F., Corno, M., D’Ambrosio, D., Acquistapace, A., Taroni, F., Savaresi, S.M., 2023. Modeling, control design and experimental automatic calibration of a leveling system for combine harvesters. Control Engineering Practice 132, 105411. Ding, Y., Kim, M., Kuindersma, S., Walsh, C.J., 2018. Human-in-the-loop optimization of hip assistance with a soft exosuit during walk-ing. Science robotics 3, eaar5438. Doerr, A., Daniel, C., Nguyen-Tuong, D., Marco, A., Schaal, S., Marc, T., Trimpe, S., 2017. Optimizing long-term predictions for model-based policy search, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. Page 30 of 37 D. Stenger et al. 227–238. Dörschel*, L., Stenger*, D., Abel, D., 2021. Safe Bayesian optimisation for controller design by utilising the parameter space approach, in: Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control, PMLR. pp. 299–311. *equal contribution. Drieß, D., Englert, P ., Toussaint, M., 2017. Constrained Bayesian op-timization of combined interaction force /task space controllers for manipulations, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 902–907. Duivenvoorden, R.R., Berkenkamp, F., Carion, N., Krause, A., Schoellig, A.P ., 2017. Constrained Bayesian optimization with particle swarms for safe adaptive controller tuning. IFAC-PapersOnLine 50, 11800– 11807. Eggensperger, K., Müller, P ., Mallik, N., Feurer, M., Sass, R., Klein, A., Awad, N., Lindauer, M., Hutter, F., 2021. HPObench: A collection of reproducible multi-fidelity benchmark problems for HPO, in: Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2). Emmerich, M., Klinkenberg, J.W., Bohrweg, N., 2008. The computation of the expected improvement in dominated hypervolume of pareto front approximations. Englert, P ., Toussaint, M., 2016. Combined optimization and reinforce-ment learning for manipulation skills., in: Robotics: Science and systems. Eriksson, D., Poloczek, M., 2021. Scalable constrained Bayesian opti-mization, in: Banerjee, A., Fukumizu, K. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-tics, PMLR. pp. 730–738. Fiducioso, M., Curi, S., Schumacher, B., Gwerder, M., Krause, A., 2019. Safe contextual Bayesian optimization for sustainable room temper-ature pid control tuning, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth In-ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19, In-ternational Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. pp. 5850–5856. Fiedler, C., Menn, J., Kreisköther, L., Trimpe, S., 2024. On safety in safe Bayesian optimization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Fiedler, C., Scherer, C.W., Trimpe, S., 2021. Practical and rigorous un-certainty bounds for Gaussian process regression. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 35, 7439–7447. Folch, J.P ., Zhang, S., Lee, R., Shafei, B., Walz, D., Tsay, C., van der Wilk, M., Misener, R., 2022. Snake: Bayesian optimization with pathwise exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 35226–35239. Forrester, A., Keane, A., Bressloff, N., 2006. Design and analysis of noisy computer experiments. AIAA Journal 44, 2331–2339. Frazier, P .I., 2018. A tutorial on Bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811 . Fröhlich, L., Klenske, E., Vinogradska, J., Daniel, C., Zeilinger, M., 2020. Noisy-input entropy search for efficient robust Bayesian optimiza-tion, in: Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR. pp. 2262–2272. Fröhlich, L.P ., Küttel, C., Arcari, E., Hewing, L., Zeilinger, M.N., Car-ron, A., 2021. Model learning and contextual controller tuning for autonomous racing. CoRR abs /2110.02710. arXiv:2110.02710 .Fröhlich, L.P ., Küttel, C., Arcari, E., Hewing, L., Zeilinger, M.N., Car-ron, A., 2022. Contextual tuning of model predictive control for au-tonomous racing, in: 2022 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 10555–10562. Fröhlich, L.P ., Zeilinger, M.N., Klenske, E.D., 2021. Cautious Bayesian optimization for efficient and scalable policy search, in: Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control, PMLR. pp. 227–240. Fröhlich Lukas P ., Klenske Edgar D., Daniel Christian G., Zeilinger Melanie N., 2019. bayesian optimization for policy search in high-dimensional systems via automatic domain selection, in: 2019 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS), pp. 757–764. Funk, N., Schaff, C., Madan, R., Yoneda, T., De Jesus, J.U., Watson, J., Gordon, E.K., Widmaier, F., Bauer, S., Srinivasa, S.S., et al., 2021. Benchmarking structured policies and policy optimization for real-world dexterous object manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automa-tion Letters 7, 478–485. Gabler, V ., Wollherr, D., 2022. bayesian optimization with unknown constraints in graphical skill models for compliant manipulation tasks using an industrial robot. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 9. Galljamov, R., Ahmadi, A., Mohseni, O., Seyfarth, A., Beckerle, P ., Shar-bafi, M.A., 2021. Adjustable compliance and force feedback as key elements for stable and efficient hopping. IEEE Robotics and Au-tomation Letters 6, 6797–6804. Gao, T., Bai, X., 2022. bayesian optimization-based three-dimensional, time-varying environment monitoring using an uav. Journal of In-telligent & Robotic Systems 105, 91. Garcia, S., Herrera, F., 2008. An extension on" statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets" for all pairwise comparisons. Journal of machine learning research 9. Garcia-Barcos, J., Martinez-Cantin, R., 2021. Robust policy search for robot navigation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 2389– 2396. Gardner, J.R., Kusner, M.J., Xu, Z.E., Weinberger, K.Q., Cunningham, J.P ., 2014. bayesian optimization with inequality constraints., in: ICML, pp. 937–945. Garnett, R., 2022. bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press. Gehrt, J.J., Liu, W., Stenger, D., Liu, S., Abel, D., 2020. Environmen-tally dependent adaptive parameterization of a gnss-aided tightly-coupled navigation filter, in: 2020 European Navigation Conference (ENC), IEEE. pp. 1–10. Gelbart, M.A., Snoek, J., Adams, R.P ., 2014. bayesian optimization with unknown constraints, in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press. p. 250–259. Ghosh, S., Berkenkamp, F., Ranade, G., Qadeer, S., Kapoor, A., 2018. Verifying controllers against adversarial examples with Bayesian op-timization, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 7306–7313. Golovin, D., Solnik, B., Moitra, S., Kochanski, G., Karro, J., Sculley, D., 2017. Google vizier: A service for black-box optimization, in: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ACM. pp. 1487–1495. González, J., Dai, Z., Damianou, A., Lawrence, N.D., 2017. Preferential Bayesian optimization, JMLR.org. pp. 1282–1291. Gras, G., Seneci, C.A., Giataganas, P ., Yang, G.Z., 2018. Gaze-assisted adaptive motion scaling optimization using graded and preference based Bayesian approaches, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 6425–6430. Greenhill, S., Rana, S., Gupta, S., Vellanki, P ., Venkatesh, S., 2020. bayesian optimization for adaptive experimental design: A review. IEEE Access 8, 13937–13948. Groot, P ., Birlutiu, A., Heskes, T., 2010. bayesian monte carlo for the global optimization of expensive functions, in: ECAI, pp. 249–254. Guerreiro, A.P ., Fonseca, C.M., Paquete, L., 2021. The hypervolume indicator: Computational problems and algorithms. ACM Comput. Surv. 54. Guevara, T.L., Taylor, N.K., Gutmann, M., Ramamoorthy, S., Subr, K., 2017. Adaptable pouring: Teaching robots not to spill using fast but approximate fluid simulation, in: 1st Conference on Robot Learning 2017, pp. 77–86. Guzman, R., Oliveira, R., Ramos, F., 2020. Heteroscedastic Bayesian optimisation for stochastic model predictive control. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 56–63. Guzman, R., Oliveira, R., Ramos, F., 2022. bayesian optimisation for robust model predictive control under model parameter uncer-tainty, in: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 5539–5545. Hamaya, M., Matsubara, T., Furukawa, J.i., Sun, Y., Yagi, S., Teramae, T., Noda, T., Morimoto, J., 2019. Exploiting human and robot mus-cle synergies for human-in-the-loop optimization of emg-based assis-tive strategies, in: 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 549–555. Hansen, N., Auger, A., Ros, R., Mersmann, O., Tušar, T., Brockhoff, D., 2021. Coco: a platform for comparing continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. Optimization Methods and Software 36, 114–144. Häse, F., Aldeghi, M., Hickman, R.J., Roch, L.M., Aspuru-Guzik, A., Page 31 of 37 D. Stenger et al. 2021. Gryffin: An algorithm for Bayesian optimization of categorical variables informed by expert knowledge. Applied Physics Reviews . Hase, F., Roch, L.M., Kreisbeck, C., Aspuru-Guzik, A., 2018. Phoenics: a Bayesian optimizer for chemistry. ACS central science . He, S., von Rohr, A., Baumann, D., Xiang, J., Trimpe, S., 2025. Simulation-aided policy tuning for black-box robot learning. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 41, 2533–2548. Hemker, T., Stelzer, M., von Stryk, O., Sakamoto, H., 2009. Efficient walking speed optimization of a humanoid robot. The International Journal of Robotics Research 28, 303–314. Hendra, K.D., Machrus, A., Nyoman, S., 2016. The comparison of op-timization for active steering control on vehicle using pid controller based on artificial intelligence techniques, in: 2016 International Seminar on Application for Technology of Information and Commu-nication (ISemantic), pp. 18–22. Hennig, P ., Schuler, C.J., 2012. Entropy search for information-efficient global optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research 13. Hernández-Lobato, J.M., Hoffman, M.W., Ghahramani, Z., 2014. Pre-dictive entropy search for efficient global optimization of black-box functions. Advances in neural information processing systems 27. Hewing, L., Wabersich, K.P ., Menner, M., Zeilinger, M.N., 2020. Learning-based model predictive control: Toward safe learning in control. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Sys-tems 3, 269–296. Hirt, S., Theiner, L., Findeisen, R., 2024. Time-series-informed closed-loop learning for sequential decision making and control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02423 . Hoffman, M., Brochu, E., De Freitas, N., et al., 2011. Portfolio alloca-tion for Bayesian optimization., in: UAI, pp. 327–336. Holm, S., 1979. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statistics , 65–70. Holzapfel, A., Brunzema, P ., Trimpe, S., 2024. Event-triggered safe Bayesian optimization on quadcopters, in: 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference, PMLR. pp. 1033–1045. Hose, H., Brunzema, P ., von Rohr, A., Gräfe, A., Schoellig, A.P ., Trimpe, S., 2025a. Fine-tuning of neural network approximate MPC without retraining via Bayesian optimization. International Conference on Robot Intelligence Technologies and Applications (RiTA) . Hose, H., Weisgerber, J., Trimpe, S., 2025b. The mini wheelbot: Atestbed for learning-based balancing, flips, and articulated driving, in: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 1339–1346. Hossen, M.A., Kharade, S., O’Kane, J.M., Schmerl, B., Garlan, D., Jamshidi, P ., 2025. Cure: Simulation-augmented auto-tuning in robotics. IEEE Transactions on Robotics . Hu, H., Kantor, G., 2017. Efficient automatic perception system param-eter tuning on site without expert supervision, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 57–66. Hutter, F., Hoos, H.H., Leyton-Brown, K., 2011. Sequential model-based optimization for general algorithm configuration, in: Coello, C.A.C. (Ed.), Learning and Intelligent Optimization, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. pp. 507–523. Hvarfner, C., Hellsten, E.O., Nardi, L., 2024. Vanilla bayesian optimiza-tion performs great in high dimensions, in: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20793–20817. Hvarfner, C., Hutter, F., Nardi, L., 2022a. Joint entropy search for maximally-informed Bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems 35, 11494–11506. Hvarfner, C., Stoll, D., Souza, A., Lindauer, M., Hutter, F., Nardi, L., 2022b. πBO: Augmenting acquisition functions with user beliefs for bayesian optimization, in: Tenth International Conference of Learn-ing Representations, ICLR 2022. Hwangbo, J., Lee, J., Dosovitskiy, A., Bellicoso, D., Tsounis, V ., Koltun, V., Hutter, M., 2019. Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science robotics 4, eaau5872. Jalas, S., Kirchen, M., Messner, P ., Winkler, P ., Hübner, L., Dirkwinkel, J., Schnepp, M., Lehe, R., Maier, A.R., 2021. bayesian optimization of a laser-plasma accelerator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 104801. Jaquier, N., Borovitskiy, V ., Smolensky, A., Terenin, A., Asfour, T., Rozo, L., 2022. Geometry-aware Bayesian optimization in robotics using riemannian matérn kernels, in: Faust, A., Hsu, D., Neumann, G. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 794–805. Jaquier, N., Rozo, L., Calinon, S., Bürger, M., 2020. bayesian optimiza-tion meets riemannian manifolds in robot learning, in: Kaelbling, L.P ., Kragic, D., Sugiura, K. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 233–246. Jones, D.R., 2001. A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response surfaces. Journal of global optimization 21, 345–383. Jones, D.R., Schonlau, M., Welch, W.J., 1998. Efficient global optimiza-tion of expensive black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimiza-tion 13, 455–492. Joseph, V .R., Hung, Y., Sudjianto, A., 2008. Blind Kriging: A New Method for Developing Metamodels. Journal of Mechanical Design 130, 031102. Junge, K., Hughes, J., Thuruthel, T.G., Iida, F., 2020. Improving robotic cooking using batch Bayesian optimization. IEEE Robotics and Au-tomation Letters 5, 760–765. Kalashnikov, D., Irpan, A., Pastor, P ., Ibarz, J., Herzog, A., Jang, E., Quillen, D., Holly, E., Kalakrishnan, M., Vanhoucke, V ., Levine, S., 2018. Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic manipulation, in: Billard, A., Dragan, A., Peters, J., Morimoto, J. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 651–673. Kandasamy, K., Dasarathy, G., Oliva, J., Schneider, J., Poczos, B., 2019. Multi-fidelity Gaussian process bandit optimisation. Journal of Arti-ficial Intelligence Research 66, 151–196. Kandasamy, K., Schneider, J., Póczos, B., 2015. High dimensional Bayesian optimisation and bandits via additive models, in: Inter-national conference on machine learning, PMLR. pp. 295–304. Kato, K., Ariizumi, R., Matsuno, F., 2017. Multiobjective optimization method for expensive functions with unknown failure regions and its application to mobile robot. Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan 35, 143–152. Kaushik, R., Arndt, K., Kyrki, V ., 2022. Safeapt: Safe simulation-to-real robot learning using diverse policies learned in simulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 6838–6845. Kavas, B., Balta, E.C., Tucker, M.R., Krishnadas, R., Rupenyan, A., Lygeros, J., Bambach, M., 2025. In-situ controller autotuning by bayesian optimization for closed-loop feedback control of laser pow-der bed fusion process. Additive Manufacturing 99, 104641. Kerimoglu, D., Soto, D., Hemsley, M.L., Brunner, J., Ha, S., Zhang, T., Goldman, D.I., 2024. Learning manipulation of steep granu-lar slopes for fast mini rover turning, in: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 16985– 16990. Khosravi, M., Behrunani, V.N., Myszkorowski, P ., Smith, R.S., Ru-penyan, A., Lygeros, J., 2022. Performance-driven cascade con-troller tuning with Bayesian optimization. IEEE Transactions on In-dustrial Electronics 69, 1032–1042. Khosravi, M., König, C., Maier, M., Smith, R.S., Lygeros, J., Rupenyan, A., 2023. Safety-aware cascade controller tuning using constrained Bayesian optimization. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 70, 2128–2138. Kiessling, A.W., Torroba, I., Sidrane, C.R., Stenius, I., Tumova, J., Folkesson, J., 2025. Efficient non-myopic layered Bayesian optimiza-tion for large-scale bathymetric informative path planning, in: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 1692–1698. Kim, J., Cho, Y., Kim, A., 2020. Proactive camera attribute control using Bayesian optimization for illumination-resilient visual naviga-tion. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 36, 1256–1271. Kim, M., Liu, C., Kim, J., Lee, S., Meguid, A., Walsh, C.J., Kuindersma, S., 2019. bayesian optimization of soft exosuits using a metabolic estimator stopping process, in: 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9173–9179. Kim, Y., Pan, Z., Hauser, K., 2021. Mo-bbo: Multi-objective bilevel Bayesian optimization for robot and behavior co-design , 9877– 9883. Kirschner, J., Mutny, M., Hiller, N., Ischebeck, R., Krause, A., 2019. Adaptive and safe Bayesian optimization in high dimensions via one-dimensional subspaces, in: Chaudhuri, K., Salakhutdinov, R. (Eds.), Page 32 of 37 D. Stenger et al. Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing, PMLR. pp. 3429–3438. König, C., Krishnadas, R., Balta, E.C., Rupenyan, A., 2025. Adap-tive Bayesian optimization for high-precision motion systems. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering . König, C., Turchetta, M., Lygeros, J., Rupenyan, A., Krause, A., 2021. Safe and efficient model-free adaptive control via Bayesian optimiza-tion, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-tomation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 9782–9788. Krause, A., Ong, C.S., 2011. Contextual Gaussian process bandit op-timization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 24. Curran Associates, Inc, pp. 2447–2455. Kristiadi, A., Immer, A., Eschenhagen, R., Fortuin, V ., 2023. Promises and pitfalls of the linearized laplace in Bayesian optimization, in: Fifth Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference. Kuindersma, S., Grupen, R., Barto, A., 2012. Variational Bayesian op-timization for runtime risk-sensitive control. Robotics: Science and systems viii , 201–208. Kushner, H.J., 1964. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in the presence of noise. Journal of Basic Engineering 86, 97–106. König, C., Ozols, M., Makarova, A., Balta, E.C., Krause, A., Rupenyan, A., 2023. Safe risk-averse Bayesian optimization for controller tun-ing. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 8208–8215. Laferrière, S., Bonizzato, M., Côté, S.L., Dancause, N., Lajoie, G., 2020. Hierarchical Bayesian optimization of spatiotemporal neurostimula-tions for targeted motor outputs. IEEE Transactions on Neural Sys-tems and Rehabilitation Engineering 28, 1452–1460. Le, V .A., Malikopoulos, A.A., 2025. Controller adaptation via learning solutions of contextual bayesian optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters . Le Riche, R., Picheny, V ., 2021. Revisiting Bayesian optimization in the light of the coco benchmark. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 64, 3063–3087. Lechuz-Sierra, J.G., Martin, A.E.H., Sundaram, A.M., Martinez-Cantin, R., Roa, M.A., 2024. bayesian optimization for robust robotic grasp-ing using a sensorized compliant hand. IEEE Robotics and Automa-tion Letters . Lester, J.C., Stone, B.A., Stelling, G.D., 1999. Lifelike pedagogical agents for mixed-initiative problem solving in constructivist learn-ing environments. User modeling and user-adapted interaction 9, 1–44. Letham, B., Karrer, B., Ottoni, G., Bakshy, E., 2019. Constrained Bayesian Optimization with Noisy Experiments. bayesian Analysis 14, 495 – 519. Li, K., Tucker, M., Gehlhar, R., Yue, Y., Ames, A.D., 2022a. Natural mul-ticontact walking for robotic assistive devices via musculoskeletal models and hybrid zero dynamics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 4283–4290. Li, M., Liu, W., Si, J., Stallrich, J.W., Huang, H., 2023. Hierarchical optimization for control of robotic knee prostheses toward improved symmetry of propulsive impulse. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 70, 1634–1642. Li, X., Zeng, H., Zhang, J., Song, A., 2022b. Engagement enhance-ment based on Bayesian optimization for adaptive assist-as-needed controller. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 49–56. Li, Y.L., Rudner, T.G., Wilson, A.G., 2024. A study of bayesian neural network surrogates for bayesian optimization, in: The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations. Lindauer, M., Eggensperger, K., Feurer, M., Biedenkapp, A., Deng, D., Benjamins, C., Ruhkopf, T., Sass, R., Hutter, F., 2022. Smac3: A ver-satile Bayesian optimization package for hyperparameter optimiza-tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 1–9. Lindberg, D.V ., Lee, H.K., 2015. Optimization under constraints by ap-plying an asymmetric entropy measure. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 24, 379–393. Liu, H., Ong, Y.S., Shen, X., Cai, J., 2020. When Gaussian process meets big data: A review of scalable gps. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 31, 4405–4423. Liu, K., Chen, Y., Zhang, T., Tian, S., Zhang, X., 2018. A survey of run-to-run control for batch processes. ISA Transactions 83, 107–125. Liu, P ., Wang, H., Qiyu, W., 2023. Bayesian optimization with switching cost: Regret analysis and lookahead variants., in: IJCAI, pp. 4011– 4018. Liu, T., Astorga, N., Seedat, N., van der Schaar, M., 2024. Large lan-guage models to enhance Bayesian optimization, in: The Twelfth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=OOxotBmGoI .Lizotte, D.J., Wang, T., Bowling, M.H., Schuurmans, D., et al., 2007. Automatic gait optimization with Gaussian process regression., in: IJCAI, pp. 944–949. Lu, Q., González, L.D., Kumar, R., Zavala, V .M., 2021. bayesian opti-mization with reference models: A case study in mpc for hvac central plants. Computers & Chemical Engineering 154, 107491. Lübsen, J., Hespe, C., Eichler, A., 2024. Towards safe multi-task Bayesian optimization, in: Abate, A., Cannon, M., Margellos, K., Pa-pachristodoulou, A. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference, PMLR. pp. 839–851. Lucchini, A., Formentin, S., Corno, M., Piga, D., Savaresi, S.M., 2020. Torque vectoring for high-performance electric vehicles: an efficient mpc calibration. IEEE Control Systems Letters , 1. Mai, H.T., Lee, J., Kang, J., Nguyen-Xuan, H., Lee, J., 2022. An im-proved blind kriging surrogate model for design optimization prob-lems. Mathematics 10. Manhães, M.M.M., Schere., S.A., Douat, L.R., Voss, M., Rauschenbach, T., 2017. Framework for fair comparisons of underwater vehicle controllers - showcasing the robustness properties of a model-free sliding mode controller tuned with a random-forest-based Bayesian optimization approach, in: Proceedings of the 7th International Con-ference on Simulation and Modeling Methodologies, Technologies and Applications - SIMULTECH„ INSTICC. SciTePress. pp. 102–113. Marchant, R., Ramos, F., 2012. bayesian optimisation for intelligent environmental monitoring, in: 2012 IEEE /RSJ international confer-ence on intelligent robots and systems, IEEE. pp. 2242–2249. Marco, A., Baumann, D., Khadiv, M., Hennig, P ., Righetti, L., Trimpe, S., 2021. Robot learning with crash constraints. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 1439–1446. Marco, A., Berkenkamp, F., Hennig, P ., Schoellig, A.P ., Krause, A., Schaal, S., Trimpe, S., 2017. Virtual vs. real: Trading off simulations and physical experiments in reinforcement learning with Bayesian optimization, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA. pp. 1557–1563. Marco, A., Hennig, P ., Bohg, J., Schaal, S., Trimpe, S., 2016. Automatic lqr tuning based on Gaussian process global optimization, in: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 270–277. Marco, A., von Rohr, A., Baumann, D., Hernández-Lobato, J.M., Trimpe, S., 2020. Excursion search for constrained Bayesian optimization under a limited budget of failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07443 .Martinez-Cantin, R., 2017. bayesian optimization with adaptive ker-nels for robot control, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3350–3356. Martinez-Cantin, R., 2019. Funneled Bayesian optimization for design, tuning and control of autonomous systems. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 49, 1489–1500. Martinez-Cantin, R., De Freitas, N., Brochu, E., Castellanos, J., Doucet, A., 2009. A Bayesian exploration-exploitation approach for optimal online sensing and planning with a visually guided mobile robot. Autonomous Robots 27, 93–103. Martinez-Cantin, R., Tee, K., McCourt, M., 2018. Practical Bayesian optimization in the presence of outliers, in: International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, PMLR. pp. 1722–1731. Marzat, J., Piet-Lahanier, H., Walter, E., 2011. Min-max hyperparam-eter tuning, with application to fault detection. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 44, 12904–12909. 18th IFAC World Congress. Marzat, J., Walter, E., Damongeot, F., Piet-Lahanier, H., 2012. Robust automatic tuning of diagnosis methods via an efficient use of costly simulations. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 45, 398–403. 16th IFAC Symposium on System Identification. Marzat, J., Walter, E., Piet-Lahanier, H., 2013. Worst-case global op-Page 33 of 37 D. Stenger et al. timization of black-box functions through kriging and relaxation. Journal of Global Optimization 55, 707–727. Marzat, J., Walter, r., Piet-Lahanier, H., Damongeot, F., 2010. Auto-matic tuning via kriging-based optimization of methods for fault de-tection and isolation, in: 2010 Conference on Control and Fault-Tolerant Systems (SysTol), pp. 505–510. doi: 10.1109/SYSTOL. 2010.5676075 .Matsubara, T., Funaki, Y., Ding, M., Ogasawara, T., Sugimoto, K., 2016. Data-efficient human training of a care motion controller for human transfer assistant robots using Bayesian optimization, in: 2016 6th IEEE International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), pp. 606–611. Matteo, T., Andreas, K., Sebastian, T., 2020. Robust model-free rein-forcement learning with multi-objective Bayesian optimization, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 10702–10708. Mengjia, Z., Dario, P ., Alberto, B., 2021. C-glisp: Preference-based global optimization under unknown constraints with applications to controller calibration. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Tech-nology , 1–12. Menn, J., Kober, M., Brunzema, P ., Stenger, D., Trimpe, S., 2026. Local preferential Bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.02351 .Menn, J., Pelizzari, P ., Fleps-Dezasse, M., Trimpe, S., 2024. Lipschitz safe Bayesian optimization for automotive control, in: IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Milano, Italy. Moˇ ckus, J., 1974. On Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum, in: Optimization techniques IFIP technical conference: Novosibirsk, July 1–7, 1974, Springer. pp. 400–404. Molodchyk, O., Teutsch, J., Faulwasser, T., 2025. Towards safe Bayesian optimization with Wiener kernel regression, in: 2025 European Con-trol Conference (ECC), IEEE. pp. 2050–2056. Moustakis, N., Mulders, S.P ., Kober, J., Wingerden, J.W.v., 2019. A prac-tical Bayesian optimization approach for the optimal estimation of the rotor effective wind speed, in: 2019 American Control Confer-ence (ACC), pp. 4179–4185. Moya-Lasheras, E., Sagues, C., 2020. Run-to-run control with Bayesian optimization for soft landing of short-stroke reluctance actuators. IEEE /ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 25, 2645–2656. Müller, S., von Rohr, A., Trimpe, S., 2021. Local policy search with bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 20708–20720. Muratore, F., Eilers, C., Gienger, M., Peters, J., 2021. Data-efficient domain randomization with Bayesian optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 911–918. Murphy, K., 2024. Reinforcement learning: an overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05265 . Neumann-Brosig, M., Marco, A., Schwarzmann, D., Trimpe, S., 2019. Data-efficient auto-tuning with Bayesian optimization: An industrial control study. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , 1– 11. Nguyen, Q., Wu, K., Gardner, J., Garnett, R., 2022. Local bayesian optimization via maximizing probability of descent, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 13190–13202. Nishimura, T., Mizushima, K., Suzuki, Y., Tsuji, T., Watanabe, T., 2017. Thin plate manipulation by an under-actuated robotic soft gripper utilizing the environment, in: 2017 IEEE /RSJ International Con-ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 1236– 1243. Nitsch, M., Stenger, D., Abel, D., 2023. Automated tuning of nonlinear Kalman filters for optimal trajectory tracking performance of AUVs. IFAC-PapersOnLine 56, 11608–11614. Nobar, M., Keller, J., Rupenyan, A., Khosravi, M., Lygeros, J., 2024. Guided Bayesian optimization: Data-efficient controller tuning with digital twin. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engi-neering . Nyikosa, F.M., Osborne, M.A., Roberts, S.J., 2018. bayesian optimiza-tion for dynamic problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03432 . Oh, C., Tomczak, J., Gavves, E., Welling, M., 2019. Combinatorial Bayesian optimization using the graph cartesian product. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Okada, M., Komatsu, M., Okumura, R., Taniguchi, T., 2023. Learn-ing compliant stiffness by impedance control-aware task segmenta-tion and multi-objective Bayesian optimization with priors, in: 2023 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS), pp. 8155–8162. O ¯ OHagan, A., 1978. On curve fitting and optimal design for regression. J. Royal Stat. Soc. B 40, 1–32. Panda, S., Padhy, N.P ., 2008. Comparison of particle swarm optimiza-tion and genetic algorithm for facts-based controller design. Applied Soft Computing 8, 1418–1427. Park, J., 2020. Contextual Bayesian optimization with trust region (cbotr) and its application to cooperative wind farm control in region 2. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments 38, 100679. Park, J., Law, K.H., 2016. bayesian ascent: A data-driven optimization scheme for real-time control with application to wind farm power maximization. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 24, 1655–1668. Parker-Holder, J., Rajan, R., Song, X., Biedenkapp, A., Miao, Y., Eimer, T., Zhang, B., Nguyen, V ., Calandra, R., Faust, A., et al., 2022. Auto-mated reinforcement learning (autorl): A survey and open problems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 74, 517–568. Paulson, J.A., Makrygiorgos, G., Mesbah, A., 2022. Adversarially ro-bust Bayesian optimization for efficient auto-tuning of generic con-trol structures under uncertainty. AIChE Journal 68, e17591. Paulson, J.A., Sorourifar, F., Mesbah, A., 2023. A tutorial on derivative-free policy learning methods for interpretable controller representa-tions, in: American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 1295–1306. Pautrat, R., Chatzilygeroudis, K., Mouret, J.B., 2018. bayesian opti-mization with automatic prior selection for data-efficient direct pol-icy search, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7571–7578. Perrone, V ., Shcherbatyi, I., Jenatton, R., Archambeau, C., Seeger, M., 2019. Constrained Bayesian optimization with max-value entropy search. Pitra, Z., Bajer, L., Holeˇ na, M., 2016. Doubly trained evolution control for the surrogate cma-es, in: Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XIV , Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 59–68. Polonio, R., Ardura, C., Preda, V ., Hewing, L., Cantos, T., 2022. bayesian optimization with temporal logic constraints for automated gnc tun-ing, in: European Conference for Aeronautics and Space Sciences (EUCASS). Puigjaner, A.G., Prajapat, M., Carron, A., Krause, A., Zeilinger, M.N., 2025. Performance-driven constrained optimal auto-tuner for mpc. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters . Rai, A., Antonova, R., Song, S., Martin, W., Geyer, H., Atkeson, C., 2018. bayesian optimization using domain knowledge on the atrias biped, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1771–1778. Ramesh, S.S., Sessa, P .G., Krause, A., Bogunovic, I., 2022. Movement penalized Bayesian optimization with application to wind energy systems, in: Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K., Oh, A. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc.. pp. 27036–27048. Rasmussen, C.E., Williams, C.K.I., 2006. Gaussian Processes for Ma-chine Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning). The MIT Press. Rath, L., von Rohr, A., Schultze, A., Trimpe, S., Corves, B., 2024. Dis-covering model structure of dynamical systems with combinatorial Bayesian optimization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Riquelme, N., Von Lücken, C., Baran, B., 2015. Performance metrics in multi-objective optimization, in: 2015 Latin American Computing Conference (CLEI), pp. 1–11. Röfer, A., Nematollahi, I., Welschehold, T., Burgard, W., Valada, A., 2024. bayesian optimization for sample-efficient policy improve-ment in robotic manipulation, in: 2024 IEEE /RSJ International Con-ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 2801– 2808. von Rohr, A., Stenger, D., Scheurenberg, D., Trimpe, S., 2024. Local Bayesian optimization for controller tuning with crash constraints. at - Automatisierungstechnik 72, 281–292. Page 34 of 37 D. Stenger et al. Roveda, L., Forgione, M., Piga, D., 2020a. Robot control parameters auto-tuning in trajectory tracking applications. Control Engineering Practice 101, 104488. Roveda, L., Forgione, M., Piga, D., 2020b. Two-stage robot controller auto-tuning methodology for trajectory tracking applications. IFAC-PapersOnLine 53, 8724–8731. Roveda, L., Mantovani, L., Maccarini, M., Braghin, F., Piga, D., 2023. Optimal physical human–robot collaborative controller with user-centric tuning. Control Engineering Practice 139, 105621. Roveda, L., Maroni, M., Mazzuchelli, L., Praolini, L., Bucca, G., Piga, D., 2021. Enhancing object detection performance through sensor pose definition with Bayesian optimization, in: 2021 IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0, pp. 699–703. Sabug Jr, L., Ruiz, F., Fagiano, L., 2021. Smgo: A set membership ap-proach to data-driven global optimization. Automatica 133, 109890. Sacks, J., Schiller, S.B., Welch, W.J., 1989. Designs for computer exper-iments. Technometrics 31, 41–47. Salman, H., Ayvali, E., Srivatsan, R.A., Ma, Y., Zevallos, N., Yasin, R., Wang, L., Simaan, N., Choset, H., 2018. Trajectory-optimized sens-ing for active search of tissue abnormalities in robotic surgery, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 5356–5363. Samaniego, F.P ., Reina, D.G., Marín, S.L.T., Arzamendia, M., Gregor, D.O., 2021. A Bayesian optimization approach for water resources monitoring through an autonomous surface vehicle: The ypacarai lake case study. IEEE Access 9, 9163–9179. Sasaki, H., Hirabayashi, T., Kawabata, K., Onuki, Y., Matsubara, T., 2020. bayesian policy optimization for waste crane with garbage in-homogeneity. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 4533–4540. Savaia, G., Sohn, Y., Formentin, S., Panzani, G., Corno, M., Savaresi, S.M., 2021. Experimental automatic calibration of a semi-active sus-pension controller via Bayesian optimization. Control Engineering Practice 112, 104826. Schillinger, M., Hartmann, B., Skalecki, P ., Meister, M., Nguyen-Tuong, D., Nelles, O., 2017. Safe active learning and safe Bayesian optimiza-tion for tuning a pi-controller. IFAC-PapersOnLine 50, 5967–5972. 20th IFAC World Congress. Shahriari, B., Swersky, K., Wang, Z., Adams, R.P ., de Freitas, N., 2016. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of Bayesian optimiza-tion. Proceedings of the IEEE 104, 148–175. Shahrokhshahi, A., Khadiv, M., Taherifar, A., Mansouri, S., Park, E.J., Arzanpour, S., 2022. Sample-efficient policy adaptation for ex-oskeletons under variations in the users and the environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 9020–9027. Shalloo, R., Dann, S., Gruse, J.N., Underwood, C., Antoine, A., Ar-ran, C., Backhouse, M., Baird, C., Balcazar, M., Bourgeois, N., et al., 2020. Automation and control of laser wakefield accelerators using Bayesian optimization. Nature communications 11, 6355. Shivaswamy, P ., Joachims, T., 2012. Online structured prediction via coactive learning, in: Proceedings of the 29th International Cofer-ence on International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 59–66. Singh Mahesh, Patel R. N., Jhapte Rajkumar, 2016. Performance com-parison of optimized controller tuning techniques for voltage stabil-ity, in: 2016 IEEE First International Conference on Control, Mea-surement and Instrumentation (CMI), pp. 11–15. Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., Adams, R.P ., 2012. Practical Bayesian opti-mization of machine learning algorithms, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Sochopoulos, A., Poliero, T., Caldwell, D., Ortiz, J., Di Natali, C., 2023. Human-in-the-loop optimization of active back-support exoskele-ton assistance via lumbosacral joint torque estimation, in: 2023 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 6090–6096. Song, X., Zhang, Q., Lee, C., Fertig, E., Huang, T.K., Belenki, L., Kochan-ski, G., Ariafar, S., Vasudevan, S., Perel, S., Golovin, D., 2024. The vizier Gaussian process bandit algorithm. Google DeepMind Techni-cal Report arXiv:2408.11527 .Sorourifar, F., Choksi, N., Paulson, J.A., 2023. Computationally efficient integrated design and predictive control of flexible energy systems using multi-fidelity simulation-based bayesian optimization. Opti-mal Control Applications and Methods 44, 549–576. Sorourifar, F., Makrygirgos, G., Mesbah, A., Paulson, J.A., 2021. Adata-driven automatic tuning method for mpc under uncertainty us-ing constrained Bayesian optimization. IFAC-PapersOnLine 54, 243– 250. 16th IFAC Symposium on Advanced Control of Chemical Pro-cesses ADCHEM 2021. Souza, J.R., Marchant, R., Ott, L., Wolf, D.F., Ramos, F., 2014. bayesian optimisation for active perception and smooth navigation, in: 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 4081–4087. Srinivas, N., Krause, A., Kakade, S., Seeger, M., 2010. Gaussian pro-cess optimization in the bandit setting: no regret and experimental design, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1015–1022. Stenger, D., 2023. Automatic tuning of control engineering algorithms with Bayesian optimization. Dissertation. Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen. Aachen. Stenger, D., Abel, D., 2022a. Autodiagnosis: Automatic data-driven configuration of an automotive fault diagnosis algorithm using noisy two-stage optimization, in: 15th European Workshop on Advanced Control and Diagnosis (ACD 2019), Springer International Publish-ing, Cham. pp. 65–80. Stenger, D., Abel, D., 2022b. Benchmark of Bayesian optimization and metaheuristics for control engineering tuning problems with crash constraints. Stenger, D., Altherr, L.C., Abel, D., 2019. Machine learning and meta-heuristics for black-box optimization of product families: A case-study investigating solution quality vs. computational overhead, in: Fortz, B., Labbé, M. (Eds.), Operations Research Proceedings 2018, Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 379–385. Stenger, D., Ay, M., Abel, D., 2020. Robust parametrization of a model predictive controller for a cnc machining center using Bayesian op-timization. IFAC-PapersOnLine 53, 10388–10394. Stenger, D., Lindicke, A., von Rohr, A., Trimpe, S., 2026. Local entropy search over descent sequences for Bayesian optimization, in: The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. Stenger, D., Nitsch, M., Abel, D., 2022. Joint constrained Bayesian optimization of planning, guidance, control, and state estimation of an autonomous underwater vehicle, in: 2022 European Control Conference (ECC), pp. 1982–1987. Stenger, D., Reuscher, T., Vallery, H., Abel, D., 2023a. Vehicle cabin cli-mate mpc parameter tuning using constrained contextual Bayesian optimization (c-cmes), in: 2023 IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 1598–1603. Stenger, D., Ritschel, R., Krabbes, F., Voßwinkel, R., Richter, H., 2023b. What is the best way to optimally parameterize the mpc cost function for vehicle guidance? Mathematics 11. Stenger, D., Scheurenberg, D., Vallery, H., Trimpe, S., 2024. Early stop-ping Bayesian optimization for controller tuning, in: 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE. pp. 3747–3753. Sui, Y., Gotovos, A., Burdick, J., Krause, A., 2015. Safe exploration for optimization with Gaussian processes, in: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, Lille, France. pp. 997–1005. Swersky, K., Snoek, J., Adams, R.P ., 2013. Multi-task Bayesian opti-mization, in: Burges, C., Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z., Weinberger, K. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc. Swersky, K., Snoek, J., Adams, R.P ., 2014. Freeze-thaw Bayesian opti-mization. Takeno, S., Tamura, T., Shitara, K., Karasuyama, M., 2022. Sequential and parallel constrained max-value entropy search via information lower bound, in: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. pp. 20960–20986. Tan, K., Niu, X., Ji, Q., Feng, L., Törngren, M., 2025. Optimal gait design for a soft quadruped robot via multi-fidelity bayesian optimization. Applied Soft Computing 169, 112568. Tang, J., Pal, A., Dai, W., Archer, C., Yi, J., Zhu, G., 2022. Borderline knock prediction using machine learned kriging model, in: 2022 American control conference (ACC), IEEE. pp. 3038–3043. Tang, W.T., Kudva, A., Paulson, J.A., 2025. Nest-bo: Fast local bayesian optimization via newton-step targeting of gradient and hessian in-Page 35 of 37 D. Stenger et al. formation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05516 . Tang, W.T., Paulson, J.A., 2024. Cages: Cost-aware gradient entropy search for efficient local multi-fidelity Bayesian optimization, in: 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE. pp. 1547–1552. Tao, Y., Li, J., Gao, G., Liu, Z., Rinderknecht, S., 2024. Goal-oriented data-driven control for a holistic thermal management system of an electric vehicle. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and En-gineering 21, 4893–4904. Tesch, M., Schneider, J., Choset, H., 2011. Using response surfaces and expected improvement to optimize snake robot gait parameters, in: 2011 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1069–1074. Tesch, M., Schneider, J., Choset, H., 2013. Expensive multiobjective optimization for robotics, in: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 973–980. Thatte, N., Duan, H., Geyer, H., 2017. A sample-efficient black-box optimizer to train policies for human-in-the-loop systems with user preferences. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 2, 993–1000. Tokmak, A., Krishnan, K.G., Schön, T.B., Baumann, D., 2025. Safe exploration in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, in: The 28th Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Toscano-Palmerin, S., Frazier, P .I., 2018. bayesian optimization with expensive integrands . TRAN, L.D., YAMAWAKI, T., YASHIMA, M., 2025. Mixed reality-enhanced spatial admittance control for human-robot collaboration using preferential Bayesian optimization. Mechanical Engineering Journal 12, 24–00305. Tu, B., Gandy, A., Kantas, N., Shafei, B., 2022. Joint entropy search for multi-objective Bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems 35, 9922–9938. Tucker, M., Cheng, M., Novoseller, E., Cheng, R., Yue, Y., Burdick, J.W., Ames, A.D., 2020a. Human preference-based learning for high-dimensional optimization of exoskeleton walking gaits, in: 2020 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 3423–3430. Tucker, M., Csomay-Shanklin, N., Ma, W.L., Ames, A.D., 2021. Preference-based learning for user-guided hzd gait generation on bipedal walking robots, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 2804–2810. Tucker, M., Li, K., Yue, Y., Ames, A.D., 2022. Polar: Preference optimization and learning algorithms for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.04404 . Tucker, M., Novoseller, E., Kann, C., Sui, Y., Yue, Y., Burdick, J.W., Ames, A.D., 2020b. Preference-based learning for exoskeleton gait opti-mization, in: 2020 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 2351–2357. Turner, R., Eriksson, D., McCourt, M., Kiili, J., Laaksonen, E., Xu, Z., Guyon, I., 2021. bayesian optimization is superior to random search for machine learning hyperparameter tuning: Analysis of the black-box optimization challenge 2020, in: Proceedings of the NeurIPS 2020 Competition and Demonstration Track, PMLR. pp. 3–26. Vasconcelos, T.d.P ., de Souza, D.A.R., Virgolino, G.C.d.M., Mattos, C.L., Gomes, J.P ., 2022. Self-tuning portfolio-based Bayesian optimiza-tion. Expert Systems with Applications 188, 115847. von Rohr, A., Trimpe, S., Marco, A., Fischer, P ., Palagi, S., 2018. Gait learning for soft microrobots controlled by light fields, in: Proceed-ings of the IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 6199–6206. Wan, X., Nguyen, V ., Ha, H., Ru, B., Lu, C., Osborne, M.A., 2021. Think global and act local: Bayesian optimisation over high-dimensional categorical and mixed search spaces, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. Wang, H., Li, X., Zheng, L., Bhaumik, A., Vadakkepat, P ., 2025a. Safe Bayesian optimization for complex control systems via additive Gaussian processes. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters . Wang, K., Dowling, A.W., 2022. bayesian optimization for chemical products and functional materials. Current Opinion in Chemical En-gineering 36, 100728. Wang, S., Li, K., 2024. Constrained Bayesian optimization under partial observations: Balanced improvements and provable convergence, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 15607–15615. Wang, X., Jin, Y., Schmitt, S., Olhofer, M., 2023. Recent advances in Bayesian optimization. ACM Comput. Surv. 55. Wang, Z., Jegelka, S., 2017. Max-value entropy search for efficient Bayesian optimization, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. pp. 3627–3635. Wang, Z., Wei, B., Ding, Z., Zhu, J., Zhang, L., Zeng, X., Yi, C., 2025b. Human-in-the-loop optimization for knee exoskeleton flexion assis-tance. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters . Watanabe, S., 2023. Tree-structured parzen estimator: Understanding its algorithm components and their roles for better empirical perfor-mance. arXiv:2304.11127 .Weber, D., Heid, S., Bode, H., Lange, J.H., Hüllermeier, E., Wallscheid, O., 2021. Safe Bayesian optimization for data-driven power elec-tronics control design in microgrids: From simulations to real-world experiments. IEEE Access 9, 35654–35669. Wen, T.C., Jacobson, M., Zhou, X., Chung, H.J., Kim, M., 2020. The personalization of stiffness for an ankle-foot prosthesis emulator using human-in-the-loop optimization, in: 2020 IEEE /RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 3431–3436. Widmer, D., Kang, D., Sukhija, B., Hübotter, J., Krause, A., Coros, S., 2023. Tuning legged locomotion controllers via safe Bayesian opti-mization, in: Tan, J., Toussaint, M., Darvish, K. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR. pp. 2444–2464. Wilcoxon, F., 1945. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Bio-metrics Bulletin 1, 80–83. Willemsen, F.J., Schoonhoven, R., Filipoviˇ c, J., Tørring, J.O., van Nieuw-poort, R., van Werkhoven, B., 2024. A methodology for comparing optimization algorithms for auto-tuning. Future Generation Com-puter Systems 159, 489–504. Wilson, J., 2024. Stopping Bayesian optimization with probabilistic regret bounds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 98264–98296. Wilson, J., Borovitskiy, V ., Terenin, A., Mostowsky, P ., Deisenroth, M., 2020. Efficiently sampling functions from Gaussian process posteri-ors, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR. pp. 10292–10302. Wischnewski, A., Betz, J., Lohmann, B., 2019. A model-free algorithm to safely approach the handling limit of an autonomous racecar, in: 2019 IEEE international conference on connected vehicles and expo (ICCVE), IEEE. pp. 1–6. Wu, K., Kim, K., Garnett, R., Gardner, J.R., 2023. The behavior and convergence of local bayesian optimization, in: Thirty-seventh Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Xu, W., Jones, C.N., Svetozarevic, B., Laughman, C.R., Chakrabarty, A., 2022. Vabo: Violation-aware Bayesian optimization for closed-loop control performance optimization with unmodeled constraints, in: 2022 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 5288–5293. Xu, W., Wang, W., Jiang, Y., Svetozarevic, B., Jones, C., 2024a. Prin-cipled preferential bayesian optimization, in: International Confer-ence on Machine Learning, PMLR. pp. 55305–55336. Xu, Y., Zheng, R., Zhang, S., Liu, M., Yu, J., 2024b. Online informative path planning of autonomous vehicles using kernel-based Bayesian optimization. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 71, 3790–3794. Xu, Z., Wang, H., Phillips, J.M., Zhe, S., 2025. Standard Gaussian process is all you need for high-dimensional Bayesian optimization, in: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations. Yamawaki, T., Yamamoto, C., Yashima, M., 2024. Motion planning for throwing manipulation using Bayesian optimization. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics 36, 758–768. Yang, J., Zhang, J., Settle, C., Rai, A., Antonova, R., Bohg, J., 2022a. Learning periodic tasks from human demonstrations, in: 2022 Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 8658–8665. Yang, L., Li, Z., Zeng, J., Sreenath, K., 2022b. bayesian optimization meets hybrid zero dynamics: Safe parameter learning for bipedal locomotion control, in: 2022 International Conference on Robotics Page 36 of 37 D. Stenger et al. and Automation (ICRA), pp. 10456–10462. Yu, C., Cao, J., Rosendo, A., 2022. Learning to climb: Constrained con-textual Bayesian optimisation on a multi-modal legged robot. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 9881–9888. Yu, W., Engels, W.P ., Stock-Williams, C., 2020. A comparison of multi-objective optimisation of two wind turbine controller designs. Jour-nal of Physics: Conference Series 1618, 022046. Yu, W., Kumar, V .C., Turk, G., Liu, C.K., 2019. Sim-to-real transfer for biped locomotion, in: 2019 ieee /rsj international conference on in-telligent robots and systems (iros), IEEE. pp. 3503–3510. Yue, X., Kontar, R.A., 2020. Why non-myopic Bayesian optimization is promising and how far should we look-ahead? a study via roll-out, in: Chiappa, S., Calandra, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-tics, PMLR. pp. 2808–2818. Zahedi, F., Chang, D., Lee, H., 2022. User-adaptive variable damp-ing control using Bayesian optimization to enhance physical human-robot interaction. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 2724– 2731. Zhai, K., Li, C., Rosendo, A., 2022. Scaffolded learning of in-place trotting gait for a quadruped robot with Bayesian optimization, in: Ang Jr, M.H., Asama, H., Lin, W., Foong, S. (Eds.), Intelligent Au-tonomous Systems 16, Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 365–373. Zhan, D., Cheng, Y., Liu, J., 2017. Expected improvement matrix-based infill criteria for expensive multiobjective optimization. IEEE Trans-actions on Evolutionary Computation 21, 956–975. Zhang, J., Zeng, H., Li, X., Xu, G., Li, Y., Song, A., 2023. bayesian opti-mization for assist-as-needed controller in robot-assisted upper limb training based on energy information. Robotica 41, 3101–3115. Zhang, Z., Bellegarda, G., Shafiee, M., Ijspeert, A., 2024. Online op-timization of central pattern generators for quadruped locomotion, in: 2024 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 13547–13554. Zhou, S., Brunke, L., Tao, A., Hall, A.W., Bejarano, F.P ., Panerati, J., Schoellig, A.P ., 2024. What is the impact of releasing code with publications?: Statistics from the machine learning, robotics, and control communities. IEEE Control Systems Magazine 44, 38–46. Zhou, X., Shroff, N., 2021. No-regret algorithms for time-varying Bayesian optimization, in: 2021 55th Annual Conference on Infor-mation Sciences and Systems (CISS), IEEE. pp. 1–6. Zhu, J., Li, S., Wang, Z., Rosendo, A., 2019. bayesian optimization of a quadruped robot during 3-dimensional locomotion, in: Conference on Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, Springer. pp. 295–306. Zwane, S., Cheney, D., Johnson, C.C., Luo, Y., Bekiroglu, Y., Killpack, M.D., Deisenroth, M.P ., 2024. Learning dynamic tasks on a large-scale soft robot in a handful of trials, in: 2024 IEEE /RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 11388–11393. Page 37 of 37