Rethinking the Implications of Human Feedback for
Preference Learning in Human-Robot Collaboration
Qiping Zhang, Kate Candon, Debasmita Ghose, Marynel V´azquez
Department of Computer Science
Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States
qiping.zhang@yale.edu
Abstract: In Human-Robot Interaction, the standard approach to learn a reward
model that represents human preferences for robot behavior consists of three steps.
First, the robot collects limited direct evidence from human feedback (e.g., pos-
itive or negative binary feedback). Then, the robot utilizes the direct evidence
to derive accepted or rejected labels to feasible but unchosen actions using fixed
implication rules. Finally, the robot updates the reward model with both the di-
rect and derived evidence. Unfortunately, the fixed rule can hinder preference
learning: in a user study with two collaborative simulation environments, human-
provided implication labels often differed from the standard fixed rule, and us-
ing the human labels substantially improved reward learning with the Preference
Learning from Implicit and Explicit Feedback (PIE) algorithm. Consequently, we
propose IMPLIED, an implication modeling method that treats fixed-rule impli-
cations as an initial guide while learning to infer and revise accepted and rejected
action labels over time. Across evaluations on recorded human-robot interaction
trajectories and a physical robot pizza-making study, IMPLIED predicts human
implications more accurately than the fixed rule approach and LLM baselines, ap-
proaching the performance of a human-label oracle. In turn, IMPLIED reduces
preference-estimation error and leads to robot actions that are more often rational
with respect to a combined reward (which includes the true preference reward and
a task-specific reward) compared to baselines. By learning to reason about the im-
plications of human feedback, this work enables more faithful and efficient robot
behavior adaptation during human-robot collaboration.
Keywords: Explicit and Implicit Human Feedback, Interactive Learning
1
Introduction
There are many valid ways to complete everyday tasks, and people have different preferences about
aspects such as action ordering, object placement, or division of labor. Because preferences are
often personal and difficult to specify in advance [1], collaborative robots must not only learn how
to help a person achieve a task goal, but also how the person prefers the task to be done.
Prior work in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) typically assumes that robots obtain direct evidence
about a person’s preferences from two sources. A person can give explicit feedback about robot
actions to indicate if actions matched their preferences via modalities like evaluative feedback [2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8], demonstrations [9, 10], or corrections [11, 12, 13, 14]. People can also provide implicit
feedback through other communicative signals in response to a particular action [15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. The direct evidence indicates if a particular action matches the user’s preference
and should be treated as accepted, or did not and should be treated as rejected. This evidence is
useful, but limited. It can be difficult to know what to infer about the other feasible actions that were
*Project website: https://implied.interactive-machines.com
10th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2026), Austin TX, USA.
arXiv:2609.13982v1  [cs.RO]  12 Sep 2026


Figure 1: (a) In a collaboration, person provides direct evidence, rejecting the robot’s executed action. (b)
Typical implication applies fixed-rule to label other feasible actions given the direct evidence. (c) Our approach,
IMPLIED, uses direct evidence overtime to revise implication labels for unchosen actions.
not taken, which we call unchosen actions. Following prior work [2, 16, 25], we call the accept and
reject labels for all actions, both chosen and unchosen, implications.
Converting limited direct evidence into broader accepted and rejected feedback sets via fixed im-
plication rules is a long-standing practice. For example, this practice is common for inverse rein-
forcement learning [26], modeling human choices for robot learning [16], interactive querying [2],
and collaborative preference learning [25]. Intuitively, negative feedback for a robot action (Fig.
1a) could indicate that the executed action is rejected and other feasible actions are accepted (Fig.
1b). But if this assumption is wrong, it could be difficult to learn correct preferences from noisy sets
of accepted and rejected behavior. To investigate this possible shortcoming, we conducted a user
study where people collaborated with a robot to perform two tasks in simulation. The tasks involved
high-level collaborative decision-making, where at each step the human and the robot each had to
select from a discrete, enumerable set of high-level actions. Participants provided direct evidence
for preference learning via explicit and implicit feedback, and also labeled unchosen human and
robot actions as accepted or rejected. We found evidence that the naive implication rules commonly
used in prior work were inconsistent with human labels, suggesting that robots could better learn
preferences if they reasoned more carefully about the unchosen actions.
To this end, we propose IMPLIED, Introspective Modeling for Preference LearnIng with EviDence.
IMPLIED uses fixed-rule implications as a prior for generating implications for human feedback
when direct evidence from the person is limited. As the interaction progresses, the robot relies more
on a Gaussian Process classifier [27] trained on the direct evidence. Because the implications are
re-computed whenever new human feedback is provided, the robot can revisit its prior decisions
for which unchosen actions should be treated as accepted or rejected (see Fig. 1c). In this sense,
IMPLIED is introspective [28, 29, 30] because it uses new evidence to revise the derived implications
of past unchosen actions.
We evaluated IMPLIED across recorded human-robot interaction trajectories from our initial user
study with simulation environments and in a second physical robot pizza-making study. We found
that IMPLIED predicted human implications more accurately than the traditional fixed-rule ap-
proach and several LLM baselines, approaching the performance of a human-label oracle. The
improved implications reduced preference-estimation error and led to robot actions that were more
often rational in relation to a reward that considered the human preferences and the task’s objective
goal. In summary, our contributions are threefold:
1. We formulate implication modeling as a learnable aspect of preference learning from feedback for
high-level collaborative decision-making, where robots infer accepted/rejected labels for actions
that are available but not taken.
2. We conduct a user study to collect human implication labels for unchosen actions, showing that
fixed implications often diverge from human judgments and affect preference learning.
2


3. We propose IMPLIED, the first approach that, to our knowledge, revises implication labels for
unchosen actions from accumulated direct evidence. We evaluate IMPLIED against state-of-the-
art baselines showing that it can facilitate preference learning.
2
Preliminaries: Learning Preferences Over a Human-Robot Collaboration
Consider a collaboration between a human (H) and a robot (R) on a task, where each has fixed roles,
e.g., the robot may pass pizza ingredients to the human, and the human may use them to assemble
a pizza. As in Candon et al. [25], we study the problem of learning a reward function that captures
the human’s preferences over the collaboration. This learning setup can be seen as a generalization
of learning preferences over robot behavior only (e.g., as in [2, 16]), as it considers both (explicit)
human feedback about the robot’s behavior and (implicit) feedback about the human’s behavior.
Collaborative Setup. We view the interaction as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) ⟨S, A, T , R⟩,
where s ∈S is the state space, A = AH × AR is the action space with aH ∈AH and aR ∈AR
the simultaneous high-level actions taken by the human and robot, T (s′|s, aH, aR) is a determin-
istic transition function from s to s′ given the actions, and R(s, aH, aR) is a shared, total reward
that the team seeks to maximize. Building off of Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning
[31], R(s, aR, aH) = Rgoal(s, aR, aH) + γRpref(s, aR, aH; w), where γ controls the relative im-
portance of a task-specific goal reward (Rgoal) and a reward that describes the human’s preferences
for the collaboration (Rpref), which is parameterized by w ∈Rd. Because of the fixed-role as-
signments, the goal and preference reward are assumed to be decomposable into individual re-
wards [25], such that the human acts to maximize RH(s, aH) = Rgoal
H (s, aH) + γRpref
H (s, aH; w),
and the robot should maximize RR(s, aR) = Rgoal
R (s, aR) + γRpref
R (s, aR; w). Importantly, the
task goal is public information, so both H and R know Rgoal
H
and Rgoal
R . Further, the human and
robot also know which features ϕ matter to describe the preference reward, but only the human
knows the preference parameters w for the collaboration. During the interaction, the robot has to
learn Rpref(s, aR, aH; w) = Rpref
R (s, aR; w) + Rpref
H (s, aH; w) = w⊺(ϕR(s, aR) + ϕH(s, aH)) by
estimating w, where ϕR and ϕH map the state and individual actions to the preference feature space.
Preference Learning from Implicit and Explicit Feedback. Candon et al. [25] proposed the
PIE algorithm for estimating the preferences considering: 1) explicit human feedback about the
robot’s actions, provided as binary evaluative feedback (although other types of explicit feedback
could be possible [2, 16]); and 2) implicit human feedback, provided via the human’s actions in
the interaction. The feedback generates what we term direct evidence for chosen actions by the
collaborators (R or H): it leads to assigning the chosen actions in a given state s to an accepted
(f +
s,m) or rejected (f −
s,m) feedback set based on the feedback modality, either explicit (m = exp) or
implicit (m = imp). Because direct evidence is limited, preference learning algorithms, including
PIE, also derive evidence for unchosen actions. They assign other feasible actions that could have
been taken in the state when the feedback was provided to the accepted or rejected sets. The process
of classifying state-action observations into the feedback sets is often referred to as the “implication”
of human feedback [2], and is not considered a learnable aspect of preference learning in prior work.
As is common in the literature (e.g., [2, 16, 26]), PIE uses a fixed set of rules to implement the
implication of human feedback. Consider a timestep in the collaboration that leads to a state s where
the robot takes action aR and the human takes aH. For explicit feedback, if the human indicates that
aR is acceptable via a positive button press, then PIE adds that state-action observation (s, aR)
to the accepted set (f +
s,exp). Also, all other possible state-action observations (s, a) for unchosen
but feasible robot actions in that state, a ∈AR(s) \ {aR}, are added to the rejected set (f −
s,exp).
Conversely, if the human indicates unacceptable robot behavior via a negative button press, (s, aR)
is added to the rejected set (f −
s,exp), and the state-action observations for other possible robot actions
are added to the accepted set (f +
s,exp). For implicit feedback, the assumption is that the human
acts optimally relative to RH. The (s, aH) observation gets added to the accepted set (f +
s,imp).
Meanwhile, the rejected set (f −
s,imp) consists of the observations (s, a) for all other possible human
actions, a ∈AH(st) \ {aH}.
3


Finally, PIE estimates the weights w using a non-parametric belief distribution computed via gradi-
ent ascent, optimizing for the log-likelihood (log L(w)) of the accepted behavior:
L(w) =
Y
(f +
s,m, f −
s,m)∈F
P
 f +
s,m|w
 =
Y
(f +
s,m, f −
s,m)∈F
P
(s,a)∈f +
s,m Bm(s, a)
P
(s,a)∈f +
s,m∪f −
s,m Bm(s, a)
(1)
where Bm(s, a) = exp(ˆβm(Rgoal
c
(s, a) + γRpref
c
(s, a))) is the exponential component of the Boltz-
mann rationality model, the collaborator c is either H (for m = imp feedback) or R (for m = exp
feedback), and the action a is the corresponding human or robot action in state s.
3
The Implications of Real Human Feedback in H-R Collaborations
With approval from our Institutional Review Board (IRB), we recruited 18 participants to collaborate
with a robot in two MuJoCo environments adapted from RoCo simulation components [32]. Half
of the participants were assigned to a Fixed-Rule condition, where the robot estimated preferences
using the standard implicature rule (as in Sec. 2) after each timestep. The other half were assigned
to the Human Implication condition, where the robot estimated preferences using the same learning
method, but with participant-provided implication labels. Thus, the condition affected the feedback
sets used by the robot in the interaction, which in turn shaped its preference updates and behavior.
Study procedure. Participants completed sandwich-making and block-sorting tasks, each for three
episodes with different initializations. These tasks involved high-level decision-making, a setting
that is common in human-robot collaboration [17, 25, 31], where interaction data is scarce and
actions must be coarse enough for the partners to communicate and reason about them.
In sandwich-making, the objective was to assemble a target sandwich; in block-sorting, the objective
was to move all blocks into bins. Both tasks require sequential collaboration where task progress
and latent preferences jointly determine desirable behavior, while differing in object semantics and
action structure. Preferences could concern, for example, ingredient order, workspace occupancy, or
color/shape-to-bin mappings. As commonly assumed in HRI (e.g., [2, 25]), we assumed that each
participant had stable preferences.
Before each task, participants selected a true preference (such as placing cheese before bread or sort-
ing blue blocks into the red bin) and used it consistently when acting and evaluating the robot. The
robot knew the task goal reward but not the weights that captured the participant’s true preference.
After each feedback step, the robot updated its preference estimate using gradient ascent on Eq. (1)
and selected later actions based on its latest preference estimate.
At each timestep, the participant and robot each selected one feasible action. Then, after both actions
were executed, the participant evaluated the robot’s action as accepted or rejected, considering both
task progress and alignment with their preference. The participant then labeled each of the robot’s
unchosen feasible actions as well, and finally labeled their own unchosen feasible actions using
the same criterion. These labels served as human ground-truth implications, indicating how direct
evidence at that timestep should extend to feasible actions that were not taken by the agents. See
Appx. A for further details on the study and task design.
Implication inconsistency. We compared the fixed-rule and human-provided implication labels
with two metrics: timestep inconsistency, which is the percentage of timesteps with at least one label
mismatch for unchosen actions; and the label inconsistency, which is the percentage of individual
unchosen-action labels that do not match across the interaction history. Both were computed per
participant and reported as mean ± standard error. Considering implications from both explicit
feedback on robot actions and implicit feedback based on human actions, the sandwich-making task
had 0.27 ± 0.03 timestep inconsistencies and 0.21 ± 0.02 label inconsistencies; meanwhile, block-
sorting had 0.41 ± 0.02 and 0.22 ± 0.01, respectively. These results show that human judgments
about unchosen actions differ substantially from the fixed implication rule.
4


0
20
40
60
80
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
L2 error
Sandwich-making
0
20
40
60
80
Interaction step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Conflict proportion
0
15
30
45
60
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Block-sorting
0
15
30
45
60
Interaction step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human
Fixed-Rule
Figure 2: Preference-learning performance, with mean
and std. error across participants. Human implications
improved learning performance. The dashed line indi-
cates the earliest task-completion step per task.
Human implications improve preference
learning.
We tested whether differences in
implications affected preference learning. We
compared the two conditions using the L2 er-
ror between the normalized preference weight
estimates and the ground-truth preferences. We
also computed the rollout conflict proportion,
i.e., the fraction of rollout robot actions that
would not maximize the combined robot reward
under the participant’s true preferences. Lower
values in Fig. 2 indicate more accurate prefer-
ences and more aligned robot behavior.
At the earliest task-completion step across par-
ticipants (vertical dashed line in Fig. 2) in
the sandwich-making task, linear mixed-effects
analyses showed that Human Implication sig-
nificantly reduced sandwich-making L2 error
relative to Fixed-Rule (0.65 ± 0.03 vs. 0.97 ±
0.10, p < 0.01). The same was observed for conflict proportion (0.10 ± 0.01 vs. 0.25 ± 0.05,
p < 0.05). In block-sorting, Human Implication also reduced L2 error (0.39±0.08 vs. 0.60±0.12)
and conflict proportion (0.11 ± 0.05 vs. 0.21 ± 0.07), though these differences were not statistically
significant. Together, these findings motivate considering the implications of human feedback as a
learnable component of preference learning.
4
The IMPLIED Method for Inferring and Revising Implications
In prior work [2, 16, 25], the feedback sets (f +
s,m, f −
s,m) used for preference learning via Eq. (1) are
generated by a fixed implication rule; however, Sec. 3 showed that these fixed-rule implications
can differ from human judgments. Thus, we propose to instead treat the implications of unchosen
actions as a learnable aspect of preference learning. Our insight is that the more direct evidence
the robot receives during the collaboration, the better it should be at inferring accepted or rejected
labels for unchosen actions. To explain how this inference process works, we re-define the format
of the elements in the accepted and rejected feedback sets: they now contain state-action pairs, as in
Sec. 2, along with metadata useful for reasoning about the implications of human feedback:
o = (
observation
z}|{
s, a,
metadata
z
}|
{
c, m, t, e )
(2)
The metadata stores information about which collaborator c ∈{H, R} took or could take the action
a, which feedback modality m ∈{exp, imp} led to the state-action observation, the timestep t
when the observation was generated, and the type of evidence e ∈{direct, derived} that was
used to classify o into the feedback sets. Observations from chosen actions by the collaborators
correspond to e = direct evidence; those for unchosen actions are e = derived evidence.
Our method, Introspective Modeling for Preference LearnIng with EviDence (IMPLIED), labels
observations o of chosen actions as accepted or rejected per the direct evidence. For example,
for explicit feedback, if a human indicates a robot’s action is acceptable, then the observation is
added to the accepted feedback set. However, for observations of actions that were not chosen
by the collaborators (i.e., the derived evidence), IMPLIED estimates the probability that any such
observation o belongs in the accepted set (f +
s,m) given all prior direct evidence D, P(o ∈f +
s,m|D).
Importantly, the set D includes both observations and their corresponding labels, indicating whether
the observations belong to the accepted or rejected feedback set. For example, if the interaction has
reached the T-th timestep, then D is:
D = {(o′, y′) | o′ = (s′, a′, c′, m′, t′, e′) ∈f +
s′,m′ ∪f −
s′,m′ ∧1 ≤t′ ≤T ∧e′ = direct}
(3)
where y′ ∈{+, −} is the observation label for o′ per the direct evidence
5


Only if the probability P(o ∈f +
s,m|D) is greater than a nominal threshold (τ = 0.5 in our experi-
ments), IMPLIED assigns the observation o for an unchosen action to the accepted set; otherwise,
it is assigned to the rejected set (f −
s,m). This classification process happens every time new feedback
is received, so the derived evidence can change over time as the interaction progresses.
Classifying observations of unchosen actions. IMPLIED defines P(o ∈f +
s,m|D) for an observa-
tion o corresponding to an unchosen action as a mixture distribution. This mixture uses the standard
fixed-rule implication [2, 16, 25] as a structured prior. Also, it takes into consideration the probabil-
ity that the observation belongs into the accepted set according to a learnable classifier trained on all
the available direct evidence D that the robot has thus far in the collaboration. The mixture is:
P(o ∈f +
s,m|D) = (1 −λ(o)) PFixed(o ∈f +
s,m|D) + λ(o) PLearned(o ∈f +
s,m|D)
(4)
where λ(o) is an observation-specific weight that balances the contributions of PFixed and PLearned.
We implement PFixed in Eq. (4) via delta functions I whose output depends on the direct evidence
obtained when the observation o = (s, a, c, m, t, e) for an unchosen action a was generated. First,
we search for the element (o′, y′) in D (as in Eq. (3)) that has o′ = (s′, a′, c′, m′, t′, e′) and the same
timestep t′ = t, state s′ = s, feedback modality m′ = m, and collaborator c′ = c as the observation
o. Then, if a′ = a, we assign the label y’ to o, PFixed = I(y′ = +). Otherwise, if a′̸ = a, we assign
the opposite label, PFixed = I(y′̸ = +).
The probability PLearned in Eq. (4) is computed with a Gaussian Process (GP) classifier [27, 33, 34]
trained using data derived from D. We chose a GP because it can learn quickly during interactions
and provides a principled mechanism to measure epistemic uncertainty, i.e., uncertainty due to a
lack of classifier knowledge [35]. We use the uncertainty to adapt the weight λ in Eq. (4), such that
when the GP uncertainty is high, IMPLIED favors the fixed prior rather than the learned probability.
Specifically, the GP represents PLearned via a function hθ : Z →[0, 1] that maps features z(o) of an
observation to the posterior probability that o should be treated as accepted, i.e., included in f +
s,m.
For the features, we use the goal reward derived from the state-action pair in o and the correspond-
ing collaborator preference features ϕc, z(o) = z((s, a, c, m, t, e)) = [Rgoal
c
(s, a), ϕc(s, a)]T . We
made this choice because both the goal reward and ϕ matter for the MDP’s combined reward R
(see Sec. 2). From an implementation perspective, the GP’s function hθ = σ ◦f is a composition
of a sigmoid likelihood function, σ(u) = 1/(1 + exp(−u)), and a latent function f ∼N(0, K)
with a linear kernel K with an additive bias component. For inference, because the sigmoid like-
lihood is non-Gaussian, we perform Monte Carlo integration with M samples. We use their mean
µ(o) =
1
M
PM
r=1 hθ(z(o)) as PLearned, and their variance v(o) =
1
M
PM
r=1(hθ(z(o)) −µ(o))2 as
the classifier’s confidence. Finally, we set λ in Eq. (4) such that it is inversely proportional to the
classifier’s uncertainty (modeled by the variance v) and bounded to [0, 1], λ(o) = 1 −4v(o). See
Appx. B for the derivation of the equation for λ and more implementation details for the GP.
5
Experiments and Results
5.1
Evaluation on Human-in-the-Loop Simulation Data
We first evaluate how well IMPLIED predicts the implications of human feedback and whether
it improves downstream preference learning using the interaction trajectories from the user study
from Sec. 3. This evaluation considers both implicit and explicit human feedback, as described
previously. However, unlike during data collection, we hold the observed states, actions, and direct
evidence fixed, and compare how different implication methods (IMPLIED and the baselines de-
scribed below) reconstruct accepted and rejected feedback sets for preference learning compared to
a human’s ground-truth implication labels.
Note that IMPLIED only changes how the feedback sets are constructed, so it is not tied to PIE:
it applies to any preference-learning algorithm that derives implications for feasible but unchosen
actions. See Appx. C for the results of IMPLIED when preference learning considers only implicit
human feedback, or only explicit feedback. Furthermore, it is possible to use a different classifier
6


0
15
30
45
60
Interaction step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
0
20
40
60
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
Sandwich-making
Block-sorting
Figure 3: F1 score of classifying
unchosen actions over time.
Table 1: Downstream preference-learning performance using different im-
plications. Values are mean ± standard error at the earliest task-completion
timestep across participants.
Human is the oracle condition using ground-
truth implication labels, and IMPLIED highlights our proposed method.
Sandwich-making
Block-sorting
Implication
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
Human
0.69 ± 0.05
0.11 ± 0.01
0.40 ± 0.06
0.10 ± 0.03
IMPLIED
0.71 ± 0.06
0.13 ± 0.01
0.42 ± 0.07
0.12 ± 0.03
Fixed-Rule
0.86 ± 0.07
0.20 ± 0.03
0.55 ± 0.07
0.20 ± 0.04
No-Prior
0.93 ± 0.06
0.20 ± 0.03
0.63 ± 0.09
0.19 ± 0.05
LLM
0.87 ± 0.08
0.19 ± 0.04
0.59 ± 0.07
0.20 ± 0.04
LLM-H
0.88 ± 0.08
0.24 ± 0.06
0.61 ± 0.08
0.21 ± 0.04
LLM-B
0.88 ± 0.08
0.20 ± 0.03
0.58 ± 0.07
0.17 ± 0.04
LLM-HB
0.85 ± 0.08
0.21 ± 0.05
0.56 ± 0.08
0.20 ± 0.05
than a GP for revising implications. For example, Appx. B.4 provides results with a K-Nearest
Neighbors (KNN) classifier. However, we have got the best results with a GP, as described in Sec. 4;
thus, our evaluation focuses on comparing IMPLIED using a GP classifier against the baselines.
Baselines. We compare IMPLIED against several baselines for inferring the implications of human
feedback. The first is the Fixed-Rule implication approach from prior work (e.g., from PIE [25],
as described in Sec. 2), which tests how implication prediction and downstream preference learning
perform with a fixed heuristic for assigning observations to feedback sets. The second baseline is
No-Prior. Since IMPLIED combines a structured fixed-rule prior with a GP-based prediction in
Eq. (4), this ablation removes the structured prior and uses only the GP classifier to predict impli-
cations for unchosen actions. Further, we compare IMPLIED against four LLM baselines (imple-
mented using Gemini 3.0 Flash) that copy the accepted/rejected labels from the direct evidence for
chosen actions, but predict with the large model the labels for unchosen actions. These baselines
serve to evaluate if a general-purpose LLM can use task context and broader world knowledge about
human preferences to generate derived evidence. The LLM baselines receive different amounts of
information when classifying unchosen actions: LLM receives only the current world state s, the exe-
cuted aH and aR actions, and explicit feedback on the robot action at that timestep; the LLM-B base-
line additionally receives a description of the preference-belief, feature by feature; LLM-H receives
the interaction history, including previous states, actions, and feedback, on top of the information
provided in the LLM baseline; and LLM-HB receives both the prior interaction history and a descrip-
tion of the preference-belief. See Appx. D for the prompts used for each LLM baseline. Finally,
we also compare IMPLIED against using Human oracle implications for preference learning. The
Human implications were collected directly from study participants (per Sec. 3).
Evaluation metrics. Since participants complete the task in different numbers of interaction steps,
we evaluate all implication-prediction methods at the earliest task-completion timestep across par-
ticipants, i.e., the largest timestep for which interaction data is available for every participant. We
consider three metrics: 1) average F1 classification score across the study participants, considering
all the labels predicted for unchosen actions up to the earliest time-completion step; 2) the average
L2 error between the ground-truth preference weights w and the normalized, average preference
weight from the preference-belief; and 3) the average rollout conflict proportion, defined as the frac-
tion of rollout robot actions that do not maximize the combined robot reward RR under the true
preference. Higher values are better for F1, and lower values are better for the latter two metrics.
How well do methods classify state-action observations (with unchosen actions) as accepted or
rejected? Fig. 3 shows the F1 classification scores over time—the Figure excludes results for the
Human implications as they involve no inference. IMPLIED (orange line) generally led to higher F1
score faster than the non-human baselines. Also, at the earliest task-completion step across partici-
pants (vertical line in Fig. 3), IMPLIED achieved the highest F1-score in both tasks. In sandwich-
making, linear mixed-effects analysis showed that IMPLIED (0.84 ± 0.01) had significantly higher
7


F1-score at the earliest task-completion step (p < 0.01). Similarly, IMPLIED (0.87 ± 0.01) signif-
icantly outperformed the non-human baselines in block-sorting at that step (p < 0.001). Thus, our
method inferred human judgments for unchosen actions more accurately than non-human baselines.
How well do methods predict the human’s preferences? Table 1 shows that preference learning
(per Eq. (1)) with IMPLIED closely approaches learning with ground-truth human implications. A
linear mixed-effects analysis for the sandwich-making task (p < 0.001) showed that IMPLIED led
to significantly lower L2 error than all non-human baselines, except for LLM-HB. Also, IMPLIED led
to significantly lower conflict proportion than all non-human baselines (p < 0.05). In block-sorting,
IMPLIED significantly outperformed all other non-human baselines on L2 error (p < 0.001) and
conflict proportion (p < 0.05). These results suggest that implication revision improves learning.
5.2
Evaluation in Real-World Human-Robot Collaboration
Workspace
Buttons
Figure 4: Collaboration setup.
With approval from our IRB, we evaluated learning during physi-
cal collaborations with 20 participants (Fig. 4). We used a pizza-
making setup validated in prior work [25], where a human collab-
orates with a Franka Panda arm to assemble toy pizzas in a lab.
Different from [25], the robot updated its preference estimate dur-
ing the interaction, rather than doing so offline. The study had a
within-subjects design, where each participant experienced robot learning per Eq. (1) with the com-
mon Fixed-Rule implication as well as with IMPLIED. The conditions were counterbalanced, and
the robot’s memory was cleared between them to avoid information leakage. For each condition,
the team made two pizzas with different recipes—but the same were used for Fixed-Rule and IM-
PLIED. Participants decided on their own when to provide explicit feedback. Implicit feedback was
received on every step based on the human’s actions. See Appx. E for more details.
Table 2:
Online learning performance for the
physical human-robot collaboration study.
Implication
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
IMPLIED
0.86 ± 0.07
0.16 ± 0.03
Fixed-Rule
1.14 ± 0.03
0.25 ± 0.03
Table 2 reports L2 preference error and conflict pro-
portion at the earliest shared task-completion step.
Linear mixed-effects analyses showed that online
learning with IMPLIED achieved significantly lower
L2 error (p < 0.01) and conflict proportion (p <
0.05) than learning with Fixed-Rule. We also mea-
sured two objective interaction costs: the number of
explicit feedback instances a participant provided, and the number of interaction steps taken to com-
plete the task. Online learning with IMPLIED required significantly fewer instances of explicit
feedback than with Fixed-Rule (34.10 ± 0.88 vs. 43.45 ± 1.05, p < 0.0001) and significantly
fewer interaction steps to completion (40.05 ± 0.83 vs. 45.35 ± 1.15, p < 0.05).
Further, at the end of the study, participants answered four comparison questions for the conditions.
Two-tailed binomial tests showed that significantly more participants reported that IMPLIED made
the robot learn faster (17/20, p < 0.01), required less teaching effort (16/20, p < 0.05), led the
robot to make fewer mistakes (17/20, p < 0.01), and was the method they would prefer the robot to
use in the future (18/20, p < 0.001). These results suggest that users perceived IMPLIED as more
preferable than the Fixed-Rule approach.
6
Related Work
There is a long history of work in preference learning. Early work (e.g., [36, 37]) focused on
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), based on the observation that in “natural learning,” a reward
function is often not explicitly specified and instead must be learned. In HRI, learning human
preferences typically involves a robot learning from human demonstrations of the task they want
the robot to complete (e.g., [9, 38, 39]) or from evaluative feedback provided by a human observer
(e.g., [3, 40]). More related to our work, recent approaches have addressed how to combine different
types of feedback: contributing a theoretical framework describing how different types of feedback
can be mapped to a choice from a set of choices [16]; integrating demonstrations together with
8


preference queries [41]; combining demonstrations, corrections, preferences, and binary feedback
[2]; reasoning about evaluative binary feedback alongside implicit feedback from human task actions
[25]; or combining instructions and demonstrations [42].
Beyond combining feedback types, several methods derive labels beyond direct human input. For
instance, Zhan et al. [43] train an adversarial network to take over the human’s role in labeling tra-
jectory pairs, SURF [44] assigns confidence-based pseudo-labels to unlabeled segment pairs, and in
text-to-image alignment, Semi-DPO [45] self-trains on a consensus-filtered subset to relabel con-
flicting preference pairs. Furthermore, D-REX [46] and SSRR [47] instead synthesize preference
rankings by injecting noise into a cloned policy. Closer to our setting, Loftin et al. [19] model the
human’s feedback strategy to interpret what the absence of feedback implies. Our work adds to
this literature by showing that the implications of human feedback can be learned during preference
learning, revising the labels of feasible unchosen actions from accumulated interaction evidence.
7
Limitations and Future Work
We proposed IMPLIED, a method that learns and revises implication labels from accumulated direct
evidence. Our results suggest that IMPLIED improves implication prediction, preference estimation,
and robot behavior in comparison to using a common fixed-rule implication or using large models
to derive evidence for preference learning.
However, our work is not without limitations, which point to interesting avenues for future work.
First, we assumed that the relevant preference-feature dimensions are known, so learning focuses on
estimating their weights (w in Eq. (1)). This follows a long tradition of using linear reward functions
in HRI, often due to sample efficiency concerns, but limits the method to tasks where designers can
specify what humans may care about. Future work could investigate ways to jointly infer both the
preference representation [20] and the weights.
Second, we focused on learning from two types of feedback modalities: binary explicit feedback,
and implicit feedback provided by the human’s actions. In the future, it would be interesting to
explore using more modalities, like demonstrations [2] or language [16] for which unified learning
formalisms exist.
Third, our experiments used structured tasks with known goal rewards and relatively stable prefer-
ences. Extending implication modeling beyond these assumptions to more open-ended collaboration
settings, where human preferences may shift over time [17, 48, 49, 50], will require richer action
representations and robustness to noisy or inconsistent feedback. Relatedly, IMPLIED assumes a
non-adversarial collaborator. A user who gives systematically misleading feedback could induce
an overconfident and wrong GP that dominates inference. Detecting such inconsistency and falling
back to the prior is an open problem.
Finally, we assumed an enumerable set of discrete high-level actions, which is also common in prior
HRI work [17, 25, 49, 51]. Future work could study implication modeling in continuous action
spaces and with vision-language-action (VLA) policies, which would first require deciding the unit
of feedback. Specifically, Eq. (1) reasons about one high-level action at a time, so implications
would instead have to be defined over trajectories. INQUIRE [2] does so, but assumes fixed, pre-
segmented trajectories, whereas during a collaboration trajectory boundaries are not obvious. Non-
collaborative VLA settings, where trajectory lengths can be pre-determined, may thus be a more
tractable entry point for this future work direction.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. IIS-2143109,
IIS-2106690, and OIA-2535195). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation (NSF). The authors are also thankful to Sasha Lew for his assistance
with the robot system that was used for the real-world evaluation presented in Sec. 5.2.
9


References
[1] P. Agrawal. The task specification problem. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1745–
1751. PMLR, 2022.
[2] T. Fitzgerald, P. Koppol, P. Callaghan, R. Q. J. H. Wong, R. Simmons, O. Kroemer, and H. Ad-
moni.
Inquire: Interactive querying for user-aware informative reasoning.
In 6th Annual
Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
[3] W. B. Knox and P. Stone. Interactively shaping agents via human reinforcement: the tamer
framework. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Knowledge Capture, K-
CAP ’09, pages 9–16, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9781605586588. doi:10.1145/1597735.1597738. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
1597735.1597738.
[4] M. L. Schrum, E. Hedlund-Botti, N. Moorman, and M. C. Gombolay.
Mind meld: Per-
sonalized meta-learning for robot-centric imitation learning.
In 2022 17th ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pages 157–165, 2022.
doi:
10.1109/HRI53351.2022.9889616.
[5] R. Akrour, M. Schoenauer, and M. Sebag. Preference-based policy learning. In Joint Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 12–27.
Springer, 2011.
[6] N. Wilde, A. Blidaru, S. L. Smith, and D. Kuli´c.
Improving user specifications for robot
behavior through active preference learning: Framework and evaluation. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 39(6):651–667, 2020.
[7] X. Wang, K. Lee, K. Hakhamaneshi, P. Abbeel, and M. Laskin. Skill preferences: Learning
to extract and execute robotic skills from human feedback. In Conference on robot learning,
pages 1259–1268. PMLR, 2022.
[8] D. J. Hejna III and D. Sadigh. Few-shot preference learning for human-in-the-loop rl. In
Conference on Robot Learning, pages 2014–2025. PMLR, 2023.
[9] B. D. Argall, S. Chernova, M. Veloso, and B. Browning. A survey of robot learning from
demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.
[10] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement
learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
2017.
[11] D. P. Losey and M. K. O’Malley. Including uncertainty when learning from human corrections.
In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 123–132. PMLR, 2018.
[12] S. Wang, A. Wang, S. Goncharova, B. Scassellati, and T. Fitzgerald. Effects of robot compe-
tency and motion legibility on human correction feedback. In 2025 20th ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pages 789–799. IEEE, 2025.
[13] A. Bajcsy, D. P. Losey, M. K. O’Malley, and A. D. Dragan. Learning from physical human
corrections, one feature at a time. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Con-
ference on Human-Robot Interaction, pages 141–149, 2018.
[14] A. Wang, S. Wang, and T. Fitzgerald. Enhancing goal inference via correction timing. In Proc.
of the 25th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages
2744–2753, 2026.
[15] D. Ghose, M. A. Lewkowicz, K. Gezahegn, J. Lee, T. Adamson, M. V´azquez, and B. Scas-
sellati. Tailoring visual object representations to human requirements: A case study with a
recycling robot. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 583–593. PMLR, 2023.
10


[16] H. J. Jeon, S. Milli, and A. Dragan. Reward-rational (implicit) choice: A unifying formal-
ism for reward learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4415–4426,
2020.
[17] D. Ghose, O. Gitelson, R. Jin, G. Abawe, M. V´azquez, and B. Scassellati. I’ve changed my
mind: Robots adapting to changing human goals during collaboration. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 11(2):1490–1497, 2025.
[18] Y. Cui, Q. Zhang, B. Knox, A. Allievi, P. Stone, and S. Niekum. The empathic framework for
task learning from implicit human feedback. In Conference on robot learning, pages 604–626.
PMLR, 2021.
[19] R. Loftin, B. Peng, J. MacGlashan, M. L. Littman, M. E. Taylor, J. Huang, and D. L. Roberts.
Learning behaviors via human-delivered discrete feedback: modeling implicit feedback strate-
gies to speed up learning. Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, 30(1):30–59, 2016.
[20] N. Dennler, S. Nikolaidis, and M. Matari´c. Contrastive learning from exploratory actions:
Leveraging natural interactions for preference elicitation. In 2025 20th ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pages 778–788, 2025.
[21] D. Ghose, O. Gitelson, M. Lewkowicz, J. Brawer, A. Roncone, M. Vazquez, and B. Scassel-
lati. Robots influencing humans to reveal their goals during collaboration and competition.
Autonomous Robots, 50(3):38, 2026.
[22] Q. Zhang, A. Narcomey, K. Candon, and M. V´azquez. Self-annotation methods for aligning
implicit and explicit human feedback in human-robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 2023
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pages 398–407, 2023.
[23] K. Candon, N. C. Georgiou, H. Zhou, S. Richardson, Q. Zhang, B. Scassellati, and
M. V´azquez. React: Two datasets for analyzing both human reactions and evaluative feed-
back to robots over time. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction, pages 885–889, 2024.
[24] Q. Zhang, N. Tsoi, M. Nagib, B. Choi, J. Tan, H.-T. L. Chiang, and M. V´azquez. Predict-
ing human perceptions of robot performance during navigation tasks. ACM Transactions on
Human-Robot Interaction, 14(3):1–27, 2025.
[25] K. Candon, Q. Zhang, A. Lew, H. Claure, L. Qian, A. Quarles, C. Sarkar, and M. V´azquez.
Learning human preferences over a human-robot collaboration based on explicit and implicit
human feedback. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction, pages 1040–1049, 2026.
[26] B. D. Ziebart, A. L. Maas, J. A. Bagnell, A. K. Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse reinforce-
ment learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pages 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
[27] C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning, volume 2.
MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.
[28] M. Fox, M. Ghallab, G. Infantes, and D. Long. Robot introspection through learned hidden
markov models. Artificial Intelligence, 170(2):59–113, 2006.
[29] K. Liang, Z. Zhang, and J. F. Fisac.
Introspective planning: Aligning robots’ uncertainty
with inherent task ambiguity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:71998–
72031, 2024.
[30] S. Daftry, S. Zeng, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert. Introspective perception: Learning to predict
failures in vision systems. In 2016 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots
and systems (IROS), pages 1743–1750. IEEE, 2016.
11


[31] D. Hadfield-Menell, S. J. Russell, P. Abbeel, and A. Dragan. Cooperative inverse reinforcement
learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, volume 29, 2016.
[32] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language
models. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
286–299. IEEE, 2024.
[33] D. J. MacKay et al. Introduction to gaussian processes. NATO ASI series F computer and
systems sciences, 168:133–166, 1998.
[34] A. G. d. G. Matthews, M. Van Der Wilk, T. Nickson, K. Fujii, A. Boukouvalas, P. Le´on-
Villagr´a, Z. Ghahramani, and J. Hensman. Gpflow: A gaussian process library using tensor-
flow. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(40):1–6, 2017.
[35] E. H¨ullermeier and W. Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning:
An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine learning, 110(3):457–506, 2021.
[36] S. Russell. Learning agents for uncertain environments. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual
conference on Computational learning theory, pages 101–103, 1998.
[37] A. Y. Ng, S. Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, volume 1,
page 2, 2000.
[38] P. Abbeel and A. Y. Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, page 1, 2004.
[39] A. G. Billard, S. Calinon, and R. Dillmann. Learning from humans. Springer handbook of
robotics, pages 1995–2014, 2016.
[40] J. MacGlashan, M. K. Ho, R. Loftin, B. Peng, G. Wang, D. L. Roberts, M. E. Taylor, and
M. L. Littman. Interactive learning from policy-dependent human feedback. In D. Precup and
Y. W. Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2285–2294. PMLR, 06–11
Aug 2017.
[41] E. Bıyık, D. P. Losey, M. Palan, N. C. Landolfi, G. Shevchuk, and D. Sadigh. Learning reward
functions from diverse sources of human feedback: Optimally integrating demonstrations and
preferences. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 41(1):45–67, 2022.
[42] F. G. Zhu, J. Oh, and R. Simmons. Interpret: Interactive policy restructuring and training
enable effective imitation learning from laypersons. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pages 864–873, 2026.
[43] H. Zhan, F. Tao, and Y. Cao.
Human-guided robot behavior learning: A gan-assisted
preference-based reinforcement learning approach. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
6(2):3545–3552, 2021.
[44] J. Park, Y. Seo, J. Shin, H. Lee, P. Abbeel, and K. Lee. Surf: Semi-supervised reward learning
with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.10050, 2022.
[45] X. Liu, M. Li, Z. Lyu, Y. Shang, and C. Chen.
Learning from noisy preferences:
A semi-supervised learning approach to direct preference optimization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.24952, 2026.
[46] D. S. Brown, W. Goo, and S. Niekum.
Better-than-demonstrator imitation learning via
automatically-ranked demonstrations.
In Conference on robot learning, pages 330–359.
PMLR, 2020.
12


[47] L. Chen, R. Paleja, and M. Gombolay. Learning from suboptimal demonstration via self-
supervised reward regression. In Conference on robot learning, pages 1262–1277. PMLR,
2021.
[48] R. Ma, J. Qu, A. Bobu, and D. Hadfield-Menell. Goal inference from open-ended dialog. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.13957, 2024.
[49] D. Ghose, O. Gitelson, M. Vazquez, and B. Scassellati. Open-ended goal inference through
actions and language for human-robot collaboration. In In Proceedings of the 2026 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI ’26), 2026.
[50] S. Jain and B. Argall. Probabilistic human intent recognition for shared autonomy in assistive
robotics. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction (THRI), 9(1):1–23, 2019.
[51] J. Brawer, D. Ghose, K. Candon, M. Qin, A. Roncone, M. V´azquez, and B. Scassellati. In-
teractive policy shaping for human-robot collaboration with transparent matrix overlays. In
Proceedings of HRI, 2023.
[52] M. G¨orner, R. Haschke, H. Ritter, and J. Zhang. Moveit! task constructor for task-level motion
planning. In 2019 International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 190–
196. IEEE, 2019.
[53] S. Thompson, A. Narcomey, A. Lew, and M. V´azquez.
Shutter: A low-cost and flexible
social robot platform for in-the-wild deployments.
In Companion of the 2024 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, HRI ’24, pages 94–96, 2024.
[54] M. Colledanchise and P. ¨Ogren. Behavior trees in robotics and AI: An introduction. CRC
Press, 2018.
13


A
Details of the User Study in MuJoCo Simulation
In this section, we describe in more detail the two simulation environments used for our initial user
study (Sec. 3), which gathered evidence that the fixed-rule implication does not always match human
judgments for unchosen actions. Fig. 5 shows a screenshot of each of the simulated tasks. For both,
the robot and the human have fixed roles.
a. Sandwich-Making
b. Block-Sorting
Human
Human
Robot
Robot
Figure 5: MuJoCo tasks. For both tasks, a human controls an agent (shown on the left side of both images).
The other agent (the robot) is autonomous. It estimates preferences and acts according to them during our user
study. These MuJoCo tasks were implemented by adapting and extending RoCo simulation components [32].
A.1
Study Protocol
We collected human feedback and implication labels in two MuJoCo human-robot collaboration
environments: sandwich-making (Fig. 5(a)) and block-sorting (Fig. 5(b)). The study was approved
by our local Institutional Review Board. In both environments, the human and robot acted in a shared
task state. Before each task, participants selected a true preference from the available options and
were instructed to use this preference consistently when choosing their own actions and evaluating
the robot. The robot knew the task goal reward but did not know the weights corresponding to
the participant’s true preference. Further details on the available task initializations and preference
options are provided in Appx. A.2 and A.3.
At each timestep, the participant first selected their own action from the available human actions
through the graphical user interface shown in Fig. 6(a). The robot also selected one action from its
available action set according to the current policy πR(aR|s) = P(aR|s) ∝exp(βRRR(s, aR)),
where the combined robot reward RR is determined by the latest preference estimate w, and βR
controls how rational the robot’s actions are. The joint human-robot actions were then rendered in
the simulation.
After the transition in simulation, the participant used the interface to give explicit binary feedback
on the robot’s action taken (Fig. 6(b)). The participant was instructed to judge whether the robot’s
action helped complete the task while respecting how they preferred the task to be performed. The
interface then asked the participant to label the implications of the robot’s unchosen actions as pos-
itive or negative (Fig. 6(c)). Finally, the participant labeled the implications of their own unchosen
actions (Fig. 6(d)).
Half of the participants were assigned to a Fixed-Rule condition, in which the robot estimated prefer-
ences using the standard implicature rule described in Sec. 2 after each timestep. The other half were
assigned to the Human Implication condition, in which the robot used the same preference-learning
method but with the participant-provided implication labels. Thus, the condition determined which
feedback sets were used by the robot during the interaction. After each feedback step, the robot
updated its preference estimate using gradient ascent on Eq. (1) and selected later actions based on
its latest preference estimate.
Each participant completed both tasks in the simulation, and the order of the two tasks was coun-
terbalanced between participants. For each task, the participant completed three episodes. The
three episodes used different initializations, randomly sampled from the available task initialization
options. Each episode continued until the task was completed. Across episodes, the participant
interacted with the robot, observed the rendered simulation state, and provided the action selections
(implicit feedback), explicit feedback, and implication labels described above.
14


(a) Human action selection.
(b) Explicit human feedback on robot action.
(c) Implications of unchosen robot actions.
(d) Implications of unchosen human actions.
Figure 6: Graphical user interface used in the MuJoCo simulation study. At each timestep, participants (a)
selected their own action, (b) provided explicit feedback on the robot’s action, (c) labeled implications for the
robot’s unchosen actions, and (d) labeled implications for their own unchosen actions.
A total of 18 participants completed the study. Each study session typically lasted 45 min, and each
participant was compensated $15. Participants were recruited through flyers, online postings, and
word of mouth, and were required to be at least 18 years old, fluent in English, and have normal or
corrected-to-normal hearing and vision.
A.2
Sandwich-Making Task
Domain basics. Fig. 5(a) shows the sandwich-making task, in which a robot and a human assemble
a target sandwich from 16 ingredients:
• Bread (4): bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3, bread slice4
• Cheese (4): cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4
• Meat (3): bacon, ham, beef patty
• Veggie (5): tomato1, tomato2, cucumber1, cucumber2, cucumber3
The task locations are storage, workspace, and sandwich, with additional robot- and human-
hand states. Initially, all ingredients are in storage, and the workspace, sandwich, and both hands
are empty. The workspace can contain at most four ingredients. The robot can move ingredients
between storage and workspace, while the human can move ingredients between workspace and
sandwich. Each episode specifies a target recipe, and completion is evaluated using required counts
over goal ingredient classes (bread, cheese, bacon, ham, beef, tomato, and cucumber).
15


State space. The task state is represented by the allocation of ingredients across the five relevant
locations: storage, workspace, sandwich, the robot’s hand, and the human’s hand. Together
with the target recipe, this allocation determines the relevant task progress: which required goal-
class counts have already been satisfied on the sandwich, which ingredients are available to each
agent, whether either agent is holding an ingredient, and whether the workspace capacity constraint
is active.
Action space and transitions.
The robot’s action space has a total of 19 actions:
16
PICK(ingredient) actions, PUT(ingredient, storage), PUT(ingredient, workspace),
and WAIT. If the robot is not holding an ingredient, it may pick an ingredient from storage or
workspace; if it is holding an ingredient, it may put it in storage or, when the workspace is
not full, put it in the workspace. The human’s action space also has a total of 19 actions: 16
PICK(ingredient) actions, PUT(ingredient, workspace), PUT(ingredient, sandwich),
and WAIT. The human may pick only from the workspace; if holding an ingredient, the human may
put it on the sandwich or return it to the workspace when space is available. WAIT is always avail-
able for both agents. At each step, the robot and human choose simultaneous actions; a pick action
transfers an ingredient to the acting agent’s hand, and a put action transfers a held ingredient to the
chosen target location.
Preference space. Human preferences are represented by a 10-dimensional weight vector,
w = [cheese before bread, cheese before meat,
cheese before veggie, bread before meat,
bread before veggie, meat before veggie,
workspace size le0, workspace size le1,
workspace size le2, workspace size le3]
The first six dimensions encode pairwise ordering preferences over the four broad ingredient types
cheese, bread, meat, and veggie. For example, a positive value of cheese before bread means
that all target cheese should be added before any target bread; a negative value represents the reverse
preference, and a value near zero represents no preference between the two types. The last four
dimensions encode preferences over workspace occupancy: dimension k is positive when the post-
action workspace size is at most k and negative otherwise. Weights are normalized to unit Euclidean
norm, and sampled preferences are constrained to have acyclic ordering preferences and consistent
workspace-size preferences.
True preference options and environment initializations. Before the sandwich-making task, par-
ticipants selected one of six preference choices and used it consistently across all sandwich-making
trials. The true preference options were:
• Preference A: Bread before cheese before veggie before meat.
• Preference B: Bread before meat before veggie.
• Preference C: Cheese before meat before bread and veggie.
• Preference D: Veggie before meat.
• Preference E: Prefer more than two ingredients in the workspace.
• Preference F: Prefer at most two ingredients in the workspace.
Each environment initialization specified one target recipe. The recipe options were:
• Initial state 1: 2 bread, 1 cheese, 1 ham, 1 bacon, 1 tomato, 1 cucumber.
• Initial state 2: 2 bread, 2 cheese, 1 beef, 1 tomato, 1 cucumber.
• Initial state 3: 2 bread, 2 cheese, 1 ham, 1 bacon, 1 beef.
• Initial state 4: 2 bread, 2 cheese, 1 ham, 1 bacon, 1 tomato.
• Initial state 5: 2 bread, 1 cheese, 2 tomato, 1 cucumber.
• Initial state 6: 1 bread, 1 cheese, 1 ham, 1 tomato.
Reward function. The shared reward is decomposed into goal and preference terms,
R(s, aR, aH) = Rgoal(s, aR, aH) + γRpref(s, aR, aH),
16


where γ controls the relative importance of the preference reward and goal reward.
For the goal reward, each agent receives a step cost of −0.3, and completing the sandwich gives
a +10 bonus. The robot is rewarded for moving still-needed target ingredients toward the human:
picking a needed target from storage gives +2, and placing a needed target from storage into the
workspace gives +3. To incentivize efficient collaboration, regressive or redundant robot actions
are penalized: picking a needed ingredient that is already in the workspace gives −2 (or −0.1 if the
workspace is full), returning a needed target to storage gives −1, cycling a workspace item back to
the workspace gives −4, handling already-satisfied target ingredients gives penalties of −3 or −5,
and handling non-target ingredients gives penalties of −2 or −10 depending on whether the action is
moving them away from or toward the main task area. Waiting while holding an ingredient, or while
a needed target remains unavailable to the human, gives −5. The human receives +2 for picking a
still-needed target from the workspace and +3 for placing it on the sandwich. Returning a needed
target to the workspace gives −1, acting on an already-satisfied target gives −3 or −5, acting on a
non-target ingredient gives −2 or −10, and attempting to place without holding an ingredient gives
−1 for the workspace or −2 for the sandwich.
The preference reward is linear in interpretable feature vectors:
Rpref(s, aR, aH) = w⊤ϕR(s, aR) + w⊤ϕH(s, aH) = w⊤(ϕR(s, aR) + ϕH(s, aH)).
The feature vectors ϕR and ϕH have the same 10 dimensions as w. Ordering features are +1 when
an action supports the preferred ingredient ordering, −1 when it violates that ordering, and 0 when
the action is irrelevant. Workspace features evaluate the workspace size induced by the action, with
features set to zero for size thresholds that are no longer relevant once too few target ingredients
remain.
A.3
Block-Sorting Task
Domain basics. Fig. 5(b) shows the block-sorting task, in which a robot and a human sort nine
blocks into two target bins. The blocks are the Cartesian product of three colors and three shapes:
• Blue: blue square, blue polygon, blue trapezoid
• Pink: pink square, pink polygon, pink trapezoid
• Yellow: yellow square, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
From left to right, the five table regions are left, red, mid, green, and right. The red and green
regions are the target bins, while left, mid, and right are staging regions. Initially, each block is
placed in one of the staging regions. The robot can reach left, red, and mid; the human can reach
mid, green, and right. The table regions do not impose capacity limits. The task is complete when
every block is in either the red or green bin and neither agent is holding a block.
State space. The task state is represented by the allocation of blocks across the five table regions
left, red, mid, green, and right, plus the two hand locations of the robot and human. This allo-
cation determines whether each block has already reached a target bin, which blocks are reachable
by each agent, whether either agent is holding a block, and whether the task is complete.
Action space and transitions.
The action space of each agent has 15 possible actions: nine
PICK(block) actions, five PLACE(block, location) actions for left, red, mid, green, and
right, and WAIT. An agent can take only actions involving regions it can reach. Thus, when the
robot is empty-handed, it may pick a block from left, red, or mid; when holding a block, it may
place it in one of those same regions. The human follows the analogous rule over mid, green, and
right. The middle region is reachable by both agents and enables handoff between the robot side
and the human side. At each step, simultaneous actions move picked blocks into the acting agent’s
hand or move held blocks to the selected reachable region. WAIT is always available.
Preference space. Human preferences specify which bin each block type should ultimately be
sorted into. The preference weight vector has nine dimensions,
w = [blue square, blue trapezoid, blue polygon,
pink square, pink trapezoid, pink polygon,
yellow square, yellow trapezoid, yellow polygon]
17


A positive weight means that the corresponding block type is preferred in the red bin, a negative
weight means that it is preferred in the green bin, and a value near zero means either bin is accept-
able. Weights are normalized to unit Euclidean norm; sampled preferences are constrained so that
not all block-bin dimensions have the same sign.
True preference options and environment initializations. Before the block-sorting task, partici-
pants selected one of six preference choices and used it consistently across all block-sorting trials.
The true preference options were:
• Preference A: Blue and yellow blocks to red; pink blocks to green.
• Preference B: Blue and yellow blocks to green; pink blocks to red.
• Preference C: Squares and polygons to red; trapezoids to green.
• Preference D: Squares and polygons to green; trapezoids to red.
• Preference E: Blue square to red; pink polygon and yellow trapezoid to green; all other blocks
either.
• Preference F: Blue polygon to green; pink trapezoid and yellow square to red; all other blocks
either.
Each environment initialization specified one initial table layout, i.e., the blocks initially placed in
the left, middle, and right staging regions:
• Initial state 1: Left: blue square, pink trapezoid, yellow polygon; Mid: pink square, blue polygon,
yellow trapezoid; Right: yellow square, blue trapezoid, pink polygon.
• Initial state 2: Left: blue square, pink square; Mid: blue polygon, pink polygon, yellow polygon,
yellow square, pink trapezoid; Right: blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid.
• Initial state 3: Left: blue square, pink square, yellow square, blue polygon; Mid: pink polygon;
Right: yellow polygon, pink trapezoid, blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid.
• Initial state 4: Left: blue square, pink trapezoid; Mid: yellow square, pink square, blue polygon;
Right: yellow polygon, blue trapezoid, pink polygon, yellow trapezoid.
• Initial state 5: Left: blue square, pink square, yellow square; Mid: blue polygon, pink polygon,
yellow polygon; Right: blue trapezoid, pink trapezoid, yellow trapezoid.
• Initial state 6: Left: blue square, blue polygon, blue trapezoid; Mid: pink square, pink polygon,
pink trapezoid; Right: yellow square, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid.
Reward function. As in the sandwich task, the shared reward decomposes into goal and preference
terms:
R(s, aR, aH) = Rgoal(s, aR, aH)+γRpref(s, aR, aH), with Rpref = w⊤(ϕR(s, aR)+ϕH(s, aH))
The goal reward uses the same cases for the robot and the human. Each agent receives a step cost
of −0.3, and completing the sort gives a +10 bonus. Goal progress is encouraged by rewarding
picks from staging regions (+0.8) and placements into either target bin (+1.5). Placing a block into
the shared middle region receives a smaller reward (+0.3) because it can support handoff between
agents. Actions that undo or delay progress are penalized: picking from a target bin gives −0.6,
placing into a side staging region gives −0.5, attempting to place without holding a block gives −1.0,
and waiting while holding a block gives −1.0. Waiting without holding a block has no additional
goal reward.
The feature vector ϕagent ∈{−1, 0, 1}9, where agent is either the human or robot, marks the block
type affected by the action. Placing a block in the red bin, or removing it from the green bin, gives
a +1 feature for that block; placing it in the green bin, or removing it from the red bin, gives a −1
feature. Actions involving the shared middle region are signed according to which side can next
make progress: robot actions that take a block from mid or human actions that place a block in mid
contribute +1, while human actions that take a block from mid or robot actions that place a block in
mid contribute −1. Otherwise, the feature will be 0.
18


A.4
Additional Preference-Learning Parameters
Table 3 summarizes the shared preference-learning parameters used for our study. Following the
learning setup used by Candon et al. [25], we used one shared set of preference-learning parame-
ters across different collaboration tasks and implication sources. This choice keeps the preference-
learning procedure general and makes the comparisons focus on the source of implication labels.
Table 3: Preference-learning parameters for user study in MuJoCo simulation.
Parameter
Value
Description
learning rate
1 × 10−4
Step size for preference-weight updates
weight samples
10
Number of samples representing the belief over weight
max iteration
1000
Maximum iterations for each preference update
convergence threshold
1 × 10−3
Threshold for preference update convergence
βR
1.0
Robot action rationality coefficient
βexp
1.0
Explicit-feedback rationality coefficient
βimp
1.0
Implicit-feedback rationality coefficient
γ
5.0
Relative weight on preference reward vs. goal reward
A.5
Demographic Information
Participants completed a demographic survey at the beginning of the study. The statistics for the 18
participants are summarized below:
• Gender: 12 participants were male and 6 were female.
• Age: The participants’ mean age was 24 years old (SD = 7.2), with ages ranging from 18 to 50.
• Familiarity with robotics: Participants rated their familiarity with robotics on a 7-point Likert
scale, where 1 indicated “not familiar at all” and 7 indicated “very familiar.” The mean rating
was 4.78 (SD = 1.40).
• Frequency of interacting with robots: 6 participants reported interacting with robots less than
once a month, 6 reported once a month, 1 reported once a week, 3 reported 2–3 times a week, 1
reported 4–6 times a week, and 1 reported daily.
B
Details of the GP Model for IMPLIED
B.1
Derivation of λ in Eq. (4)
We use the variance v(o) to derive λ(o) in Eq. (4). The function λ(o) returns an observation-specific
weight that balances the contributions of the fixed-rule prior and the learned GP. Since implication
labels are binary, the learned GP outputs a probability for the positive implication label, which can
be interpreted as the parameter of a Bernoulli distribution over accepted/rejected labels. The most
uncertain case occurs when this probability is p = 0.5, where the two labels are equally likely. The
corresponding Bernoulli variance is therefore maximized at vmax = p(1 −p) = 0.25. We use this
maximum variance to normalize the GP uncertainty and let:
λ(o) = 1 −v(o)/vmax = 1 −4v(o) ∈[0, 1]
(5)
This choice gives a bounded weight in [0, 1] and makes the confidence in the learned GP higher when
the model is more certain, i.e., when the variance is lower. This confidence also reflects distance
from the decision boundary, which we set to 0.5 probability in our experiments. If the probability
samples behave like Bernoulli draws with mean µ(o), then:
v(o) ≈µ(o)(1 −µ(o))
(6)
λ(o) = 1 −4v(o)
≈1 −4µ(o)(1 −µ(o))
= 1 −4µ(o) + 4µ(o)2
= 4(µ(o) −0.5)2.
(7)
Thus, λ(o) is small when µ(o) is near 0.5 and large when µ(o) is near 0 or 1.
19


B.2
GP Hyperparameter Search
For the GP classifier in Sec. 4, the covariance matrix K is computed from Z-score normalized
observation features. Let ˜z(o) denote the standardized version of z(o). For two observations oi
and oj, we use Kij = kθ(˜z(oi), ˜z(oj)), with kθ(˜z, ˜z′) = σ2
ℓ˜z⊤˜z′ + σ2
b. Here, the parameters
θ = (σ2
ℓ, σ2
b), where σ2
ℓcontrols the scale of the linear dependence on the feature inputs, and
σ2
b is the additive bias variance, allowing the latent acceptance function to include a global offset.
Thus, the latent function values used by hθ = σ ◦f follow the GP prior induced by this kernel,
f ∼N(0, K).
For experiments with human-in-the-loop simulation data, we used leave-one-participant-out cross-
validation, as explained in Appx. C. For the GP, the train/val split served to select the GP ker-
nel hyperparameters θ = (σ2
ℓ, σ2
b) separately within each leave-one-participant-out fold. We se-
lected θ from a finite grid formed by the Cartesian product of σ2
ℓ∈{0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0} and
σ2
b ∈{0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0}. Specifically, in each fold, one participant was held out for test-
ing, and the remaining participants were split into 80% training and 20% validation participants.
For each candidate θ, we fit the GP classifier using cumulative direct evidence from the training
participants and evaluate implication-prediction performance on the validation participants. The pa-
rameter setting with the best validation performance is then fixed and used for making predictions
on the held-out test participant. Implication labels from the held-out participant are never used for
hyperparameter selection.
For experiments with real-world human-robot collaboration, we use a single parameter setting se-
lected from the search performed for the simulation data. Specifically, we chose the parameters most
frequently selected as optimal across the simulation folds, yielding σ2
ℓ= 1.0 and σ2
b = 0.2. These
values were used for all participants in the real-world human-robot collaboration (Sec. 5.2).
B.3
Sensitivity to the Threshold τ
We set τ = 0.5 in Sec. 4 because it is the standard decision boundary for binary classification. To
verify that the choice is reasonable, we conducted a sensitivity analysis by re-running the evaluation
of Sec. 5.1 on data from Sec. 3 with τ ∈{0.25, 0.5, 0.75}. Table 4 reports the results. In sandwich-
making, τ = 0.5 significantly outperformed both alternatives on all three metrics (p < 0.05). In
block-sorting, τ = 0.5 significantly outperformed τ = 0.25 and τ = 0.75 on F1 (p < 0.01), and
outperformed τ = 0.25 on L2 error (p < 0.05). We further swept τ in increments of 0.05 for both
tasks and found no significant difference from τ = 0.5 for τ ∈[0.40, 0.60].
Table 4: Sensitivity analysis for the threshold τ.
Task
τ
F1 ↑
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
Sandwich-making
0.25
0.77 ± 0.03
0.84 ± 0.06
0.18 ± 0.04
0.50
0.84 ± 0.01
0.71 ± 0.06
0.13 ± 0.01
0.75
0.76 ± 0.02
0.80 ± 0.07
0.17 ± 0.03
Block-sorting
0.25
0.72 ± 0.04
0.56 ± 0.08
0.16 ± 0.05
0.50
0.87 ± 0.01
0.42 ± 0.07
0.12 ± 0.03
0.75
0.74 ± 0.01
0.49 ± 0.07
0.16 ± 0.04
B.4
Comparison with a Simpler Learned Classifier
We tested whether a simpler learner for IMPLIED could lead to performance close to that of the GP.
We swapped PLearned for a K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) classifier, keeping the same set of features
z(o), the Z-score normalization, and the mixture in Eq. (4). We selected k ∈{3, 5, 7, 9} using
the leave-one-participant-out cross validation mentioned in Appx. B.2. We set µ(o) to the fraction
of neighbors voting for the accepted label and used the corresponding Bernoulli variance v(o) =
µ(o)(1 −µ(o)) to compute λ(o) = 1 −4v(o).
On the recorded interaction data from Sec. 3, GP outperformed KNN at the earliest shared task-
completion step. In sandwich-making, GP led to significantly higher F1 (0.84±0.01 vs. 0.75±0.03,
p < 0.01), lower L2 error (0.71 ± 0.06 vs. 0.89 ± 0.07, p < 0.001), and lower conflict proportion
20


(0.13 ± 0.01 vs. 0.19 ± 0.03, p < 0.05) than KNN. In block-sorting, GP also led to significantly
higher F1 (0.87 ± 0.01 vs. 0.71 ± 0.03, p < 0.001), lower L2 error (0.42 ± 0.07 vs. 0.60 ± 0.08,
p < 0.001), and lower conflict proportion (0.12 ± 0.03 vs. 0.20 ± 0.05, p < 0.05) than KNN.
C
Learning with Human-in-the-Loop Simulation Data
In Sec. 5.1, we evaluate implication prediction and preference learning using both implicit feed-
back from human actions and explicit feedback on robot actions. For these experiments, we use
leave-one-participant-out cross-validation to measure generalization performance. In each fold, one
participant was held out for testing, and the remaining participants were split into 80% training and
20% validation participants. The training and validation data served to fit hyperparameters, e.g., for
the GP in IMPLIED and the No-Prior baseline, as mentioned in Appx. B.
For the Large Language Model baselines, we used Gemini 3.0 Flash, with a temperature of 0 (mak-
ing the output the most deterministic possible) and a high thinking level. We chose this particular
model because it is faster than other frontier “Pro” models, like Gemini 3.0 Pro, allowing for learning
during collaborations as opposed to afterwards.
The next sections provide additional analyses that isolate each feedback modality. The evaluation
protocol is the same as described before and in Sec. 5.1: we hold the recorded MuJoCo interaction
0
20
40
60
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
0
15
30
45
60
Interaction step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
Block-sorting
Sandwich-making
Figure 7: F1 score for classifying
unchosen robot actions over time
with explicit feedback only. See
first column of Tab. 5 for legend.
Table 5: Downstream preference-learning performance using explicit feed-
back only. Learning is achieved per Eq. (1) with gradient ascent, but the
actions of the human are not considered as evidence for learning. Each row
in the table shows results for different implication approaches. Values are
mean ± standard error at the earliest task-completion timestep across partic-
ipants. Human uses ground-truth implication labels for explicit feedback,
and IMPLIED highlights our proposed method.
Sandwich-making
Block-sorting
Implication
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
Human
0.83 ± 0.05
0.15 ± 0.02
0.62 ± 0.06
0.15 ± 0.03
IMPLIED
0.87 ± 0.06
0.16 ± 0.02
0.66 ± 0.07
0.14 ± 0.02
Fixed-Rule
1.03 ± 0.06
0.25 ± 0.04
0.79 ± 0.06
0.26 ± 0.04
No-Prior
1.01 ± 0.06
0.26 ± 0.03
0.91 ± 0.08
0.30 ± 0.04
LLM
1.09 ± 0.07
0.29 ± 0.06
0.85 ± 0.05
0.33 ± 0.04
LLM-H
1.07 ± 0.08
0.27 ± 0.04
0.78 ± 0.06
0.26 ± 0.04
LLM-B
1.08 ± 0.07
0.30 ± 0.05
0.87 ± 0.06
0.31 ± 0.05
LLM-HB
1.05 ± 0.08
0.24 ± 0.05
0.84 ± 0.06
0.34 ± 0.04
0
20
40
60
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
0
15
30
45
60
Interaction step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1 score
Block-sorting
Sandwich-making
Figure 8: F1 score for classifying
unchosen human actions over time
using implicit feedback only. See
first column of Tab. 6 for legend.
Table 6: Downstream preference-learning performance using implicit feed-
back only. Learning is achieved per Eq. (1) with gradient ascent, but no
feedback about the robot actions is considered as evidence for learning.
Each row in the table shows results for different implication approaches.
Values are mean ± standard error at the earliest task-completion timestep
across participants.
Human uses ground-truth implication labels for im-
plicit feedback, and IMPLIED highlights our proposed method.
Sandwich-making
Block-sorting
Implication
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
L2 Error ↓
Conflict Prop. ↓
Human
0.81 ± 0.05
0.25 ± 0.03
0.53 ± 0.08
0.16 ± 0.04
IMPLIED
0.84 ± 0.05
0.25 ± 0.03
0.56 ± 0.08
0.18 ± 0.05
Fixed-Rule
0.86 ± 0.06
0.24 ± 0.03
0.66 ± 0.07
0.28 ± 0.06
No-Prior
1.01 ± 0.07
0.30 ± 0.04
0.74 ± 0.07
0.31 ± 0.05
LLM
0.82 ± 0.06
0.27 ± 0.03
0.67 ± 0.07
0.26 ± 0.05
LLM-H
0.85 ± 0.06
0.29 ± 0.04
0.71 ± 0.08
0.26 ± 0.05
LLM-B
0.77 ± 0.06
0.26 ± 0.03
0.68 ± 0.07
0.25 ± 0.06
LLM-HB
0.83 ± 0.06
0.26 ± 0.03
0.65 ± 0.07
0.27 ± 0.05
21


trajectories fixed, apply each implication method to construct accepted and rejected feedback sets,
and evaluate both implication-label prediction and downstream preference learning.
Explicit feedback only. Fig. 7 and Table 5 show results when preference learning uses only explicit
feedback on the robot’s executed actions and the corresponding implications for unchosen robot
actions. The overall trend is consistent with the combined-feedback results: IMPLIED led to a
higher F1 score faster than the non-human baselines. Also, at the earliest task-completion step
across participants (vertical dashed line in Fig. 7), IMPLIED achieved the highest F1-score in both
tasks. In sandwich-making, linear mixed-effects analyses showed that IMPLIED (0.86 ± 0.02)
achieved significantly higher F1-score than the non-human baselines at the earliest task-completion
step (p < 0.05). Likewise, in block-sorting, IMPLIED (0.84 ± 0.01) got significantly higher F1
at that step (p < 0.05). In downstream learning (Table 5), a linear mixed-effects analysis for the
sandwich-making task showed that IMPLIED achieved significantly lower L2 error (p < 0.01) than
all non-human baselines, except for No-Prior, and significantly lower conflict proportion (p <
0.05) than all non-human baselines. For block-sorting, IMPLIED also significantly outperformed
all other non-human baselines on L2 error (p < 0.05) and conflict proportion (p < 0.01). These
results suggest that, even when only explicit robot-action feedback is available, revising implications
from accumulated direct evidence improves the feedback sets used for preference learning.
Implicit feedback only. Fig. 8 and Table 6 show results when preference learning uses only implicit
feedback from the human’s executed task actions and the corresponding implications for unchosen
human actions. In block-sorting, the results again follow the main trend: IMPLIED led to a higher
F1 score faster than the non-human baselines. A linear mixed-effects analysis showed that IMPLIED
(0.86±0.01) achieved significantly higher F1-score than the non-human baselines at the earliest task-
completion step (vertical dashed line in Fig. 8), with p < 0.0001. In downstream learning, a linear
mixed-effects analysis showed that IMPLIED achieved significantly lower L2 error (p < 0.05) and
conflict proportion (p < 0.05) than all non-human baselines in block sorting. This indicates that the
method can also revise implications derived from human action choices, not only explicit evaluations
of robot actions.
When learning in the sandwich-making task with implicit feedback only, we found different results
than all of our prior results: IMPLIED underperformed the Fixed-Rule baseline in terms of F1
classification score (Fig. 8). We attribute this result to the design of the sandwich-making task. In
this task, the implicit-feedback action space available to the human was more constrained than for the
block-sorting task, and human implication labels for implicit feedback had very low inconsistency
against the fixed rule (0.04 ± 0.01 timestep inconsistencies and 0.03 ± 0.01 label inconsistencies).
Despite this, IMPLIED led to 0.84 ± 0.05 L2 Error on preference learning versus 0.86 ± 0.06 at the
earliest task-completion step (which were not significantly different, p = 0.3945). Also, IMPLIED
led to very similar Conflict Proportion performance (0.25 ± 0.03 vs. 0.24 ± 0.03), suggesting that
IMPLIED does not hinder preference learning in a meaningful way when the fixed-rule prior is close
to the optimal implications for a given task.
D
Prompts for LLM Baselines
Sec. 5.1 compares IMPLIED with four LLM baselines that differ in whether the model receives prior
interaction history and/or the current preference-belief summary. Below, we show representative
prompts from the most informative condition, LLM-HB, which includes both the interaction history
(H) and the preference-belief description (B). The first prompt corresponds to the sandwich-making
task; the second one to the block-sorting task. The other LLM baselines use the same prompt
structure but remove the corresponding information parts: LLM removes both history and belief,
LLM-H removes only the belief part, and LLM-B removes only the history part. Each prompt asks the
LLM to label the current timestep’s unchosen robot and human actions as accepted or rejected and
to return strict JSON.
Example LLM-HB prompt for the sandwich-making task.
You are a robot collaborating with a human to make a sandwich together.
In the environment, there are three areas:
the storage, the workspace, and
the sandwich area.
22


The storage initially contains ingredient instances from four ingredient
types:
cheese, bread, meat, and veggies.
These ingredients are selected and used to make the sandwich.
The workspace starts empty.
You (Robot) can:
- PICK ingredients from storage to your hand,
- PUT ingredients from your hand to workspace,
- PICK ingredients from workspace to your hand,
- PUT ingredients from your hand back to storage,
- WAIT.
The workspace can contain at most 4 ingredients.
The human can:
- PICK ingredients from workspace,
- PUT ingredients from hand to sandwich,
- PUT ingredients from hand back to workspace,
- WAIT.
You can only reach storage/workspace.
The human can only reach
workspace/sandwich.
In each step, you (Robot) and the human act simultaneously.
The human also gives explicit binary feedback (positive or negative) on your
executed action.
The objective of the collaboration is to achieve the task goal efficiently
while also ensuring that robot and human actions align with the human’s
preference for how the task should be performed.
In the collaboration, the human has a fixed latent preference that defines how
the goal should be achieved, and the human consistently follows this
preference when selecting actions and providing feedback.
The human’s actions and explicit binary feedback to you reflect both task-goal
progress and this preference.
The goal of each sandwich-making task is to complete a specific target
sandwich in as few steps as possible, and the task goal may change when a new
task begins.
The human’s preference over the collaboration specifies how the target
sandwich should be made, and this preference does not change across tasks.
In particular, the human cares about the following aspects of the
collaboration:
1) The order in which ingredient types are used (6 dimensions):
- cheese before bread
- cheese before meat
- cheese before veggie
- bread before meat
- bread before veggie
- meat before veggie
Here, ingredient types are cheese, bread, meat, and veggie.
Each dimension
reflects whether one ingredient type should generally be completed before
another.
Example:
’cheese before bread’ means required cheese ingredients should be
placed before required bread ingredients.
2) How full the workspace should be during collaboration (4 dimensions):
- whether the human prefers the workspace to contain at most 0 ingredients,
- at most 1 ingredient,
- at most 2 ingredients,
- or at most 3 ingredients, whenever possible.
In each task, you know the target sandwich recipe goal, but you do not know
the human’s latent preference.
Infer it from interaction history and
feedback.
Below is the history of the collaboration tasks between you and the human:
Task 1:
Sandwich recipe goal: 1 cheese, 2 breads, 1 bacon, 1 ham, 1 tomato, 1 cucumber
Step 0
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
23


- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2,
cucumber3, ham, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK cucumber2 storage (veggie)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 1
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
cucumber2
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, ham,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT cucumber2 workspace (veggie)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 2
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, ham,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK ham storage (meat)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 3
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
ham
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT ham workspace (meat)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 4
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
cucumber2, ham
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK cheese3 storage (cheese)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 5
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
cheese3
24


- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1,
tomato2
- workspace:
cucumber2, ham
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT cheese3 workspace (cheese)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 6
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1,
tomato2
- workspace:
cheese3, cucumber2, ham
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK bread slice1 storage (bread)
- Human:
PICK cheese3 workspace (cheese)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 7
State:
- human hand:
cheese3
- robot hand:
bread slice1
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice2, bread slice3, bread slice4,
cheese1, cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
cucumber2, ham
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT bread slice1 workspace (bread)
- Human:
PUT cheese3 sandwich (cheese)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 8
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice2, bread slice3, bread slice4,
cheese1, cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
bread slice1, cucumber2, ham
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK bacon storage (meat)
- Human:
PICK ham workspace (meat)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 9
State:
- human hand:
ham
- robot hand:
bacon
- sandwich:
cheese3
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice2, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1,
cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
bread slice1, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT bacon workspace (meat)
- Human:
PUT ham sandwich (meat)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 10
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice2, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1,
cheese2, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
25


- workspace:
bacon, bread slice1, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK bread slice2 storage (bread)
- Human:
PICK bacon workspace (meat)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 11
State:
- human hand:
bacon
- robot hand:
bread slice2
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
bread slice1, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT bread slice2 workspace (bread)
- Human:
PUT bacon sandwich (meat)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 12
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
bread slice1, bread slice2, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK tomato2 storage (veggie)
- Human:
PICK bread slice1 workspace (bread)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 13
State:
- human hand:
bread slice1
- robot hand:
tomato2
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
bread slice2, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT tomato2 workspace (veggie)
- Human:
PUT bread slice1 sandwich (bread)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 14
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
bread slice2, cucumber2, tomato2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PICK tomato2 workspace (veggie)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 15
State:
- human hand:
tomato2
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
bread slice2, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PUT tomato2 sandwich (veggie)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
26


Step 16
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1, tomato2
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
bread slice2, cucumber2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK bread slice2 workspace (bread)
- Human:
PICK cucumber2 workspace (veggie)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 17
State:
- human hand:
cucumber2
- robot hand:
bread slice2
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1, tomato2
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT bread slice2 workspace (bread)
- Human:
PUT cucumber2 sandwich (veggie)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 18
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1, tomato2, cucumber2
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
bread slice2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PICK bread slice2 workspace (bread)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 19
State:
- human hand:
bread slice2
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese3, ham, bacon, bread slice1, tomato2, cucumber2
- storage:
beef patty, bread slice3, bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2,
cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber3, tomato1
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PUT bread slice2 sandwich (bread)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Task 2:
Sandwich recipe goal: 2 cheeses, 2 breads, 1 beef patty, 1 tomato, 1 cucumber
Step 0
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2,
cucumber3, ham, tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK cheese2 storage (cheese)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 1
27


State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
cheese2
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2, cucumber3, ham,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT cheese2 workspace (cheese)
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 2
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese3, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2, cucumber3, ham,
tomato1, tomato2
- workspace:
cheese2
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK cheese3 storage (cheese)
- Human:
PICK cheese2 workspace (cheese)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 3
State:
- human hand:
cheese2
- robot hand:
cheese3
- sandwich:
(empty)
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2, cucumber3, ham, tomato1,
tomato2
- workspace:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PUT cheese3 workspace (cheese)
- Human:
PUT cheese2 sandwich (cheese)
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Current step (Task 2, Step 4):
Sandwich recipe goal: 2 cheeses, 2 breads, 1 beef patty, 1 tomato, 1 cucumber
- State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- sandwich:
cheese2
- storage:
bacon, beef patty, bread slice1, bread slice2, bread slice3,
bread slice4, cheese1, cheese4, cucumber1, cucumber2, cucumber3, ham, tomato1,
tomato2
- workspace:
cheese3
- Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PICK cheese3 workspace (cheese)
- Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Latest belief over preference before incorporating the CURRENT step:
- cheese before bread:
10/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 0/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- cheese before meat:
3/10 strong accept, 7/10 weak accept, 0/10 weak reject,
0/10 strong reject
- cheese before veggie:
0/10 strong accept, 9/10 weak accept, 1/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- bread before meat:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 10/10 weak reject,
0/10 strong reject
- bread before veggie:
0/10 strong accept, 1/10 weak accept, 9/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
28


- meat before veggie:
3/10 strong accept, 7/10 weak accept, 0/10 weak reject,
0/10 strong reject
- workspace at most 0 ingredients:
0/10 strong accept, 3/10 weak accept, 7/10
weak reject, 0/10 strong reject
- workspace at most 1 ingredient:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 10/10
weak reject, 0/10 strong reject
- workspace at most 2 ingredients:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept,
10/10 weak reject, 0/10 strong reject
- workspace at most 3 ingredients:
0/10 strong accept, 3/10 weak accept, 7/10
weak reject, 0/10 strong reject
- The unchosen actions:
Your unchosen actions:
PICK bacon storage (meat), PICK ham storage (meat),
PICK beef patty storage (meat), PICK bread slice storage (bread), PICK cheese
storage (cheese), PICK cheese3 workspace (cheese), PICK tomato storage
(veggie), PICK cucumber storage (veggie)
Human unchosen actions:
WAIT
Now, based on the collaboration history (states, actions, human feedback), and the latest belief
over the human’s preference before the CURRENT step, predict the human feedback for each
action that you and the human did not choose, in the CURRENT step only, considering both the
task goal and the human’s preference.
Label each unchosen action as:
- accepted:
accepted behavior with respect to both task-goal progress and
inferred human preference.
- rejected:
rejected behavior with respect to task-goal progress and/or
inferred human preference.
Rules:
1) Only include unique action keys from the provided unchosen actions of you
("Robot") and the human ("Human").
2) Every label must be exactly ’accepted’ or ’rejected’.
3) Return JSON only.
Return STRICT JSON only with this shape:
{
"Robot":
{
"PICK bacon storage (meat)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK ham storage (meat)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK beef patty storage (meat)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK bread slice storage (bread)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK cheese storage (cheese)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK cheese3 workspace (cheese)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK tomato storage (veggie)":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK cucumber storage (veggie)":
"accepted|rejected"
},
"Human":
{
"WAIT":
"accepted|rejected"
}
}
Example LLM-HB prompt for the block-sorting task.
You are a robot collaborating with a human to sort the blocks on the table
together.
In the environment, there are nine unique blocks:
- blue square
- blue polygon
- blue trapezoid
- pink square
- pink polygon
- pink trapezoid
- yellow square
- yellow polygon
- yellow trapezoid
29


From left to right, there are five areas:
left panel, red bin, middle panel,
green bin, right panel.
The blocks are initially placed in the left panel, the middle panel, or the
right panel.
You can only reach the left panel, the middle panel, and the red bin.
The human can only reach the middle panel, the right panel, and the green bin.
The middle panel can be reached by both you and the human.
Both you and the human can pick blocks from and place blocks into reachable
areas.
All areas can contain any number of blocks.
In each step, you (Robot) and the human act simultaneously.
The human also gives explicit binary feedback (positive or negative) on your
executed action.
The objective of the collaboration is to achieve the task goal efficiently
while also ensuring that robot and human actions align with the human’s
preference for how the task should be performed.
In the collaboration, the human has a fixed latent preference that defines how
the goal should be achieved, and the human consistently follows this
preference when selecting actions and providing feedback.
The human’s actions and explicit binary feedback to you reflect both task-goal
progress and this preference.
The goal of each block-sorting task is to place all blocks into either the red
bin or the green bin in as few steps as possible.
The human’s preference over the collaboration specifies how the blocks should
be sorted, and this preference does not change across tasks.
In particular, the human cares about which bin each block should be sorted
into.
There are 9 preference dimensions, one for each unique block type:
- blue square
- blue trapezoid
- blue polygon
- pink square
- pink trapezoid
- pink polygon
- yellow square
- yellow trapezoid
- yellow polygon
For each block type, a positive preference means the human prefers that block
in the red bin, while a negative preference means the human prefers that block
in the green bin.
In each task, you know the sorting goal, but you do not know the human’s
latent preference.
Infer it from interaction history and feedback.
Below is the history of the collaboration tasks between you and the human:
Task 1:
Block-sorting goal: place all blocks into either the red bin or the green bin
Step 0
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
blue polygon, pink square, yellow square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK pink square mid
- Human:
PICK yellow trapezoid right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 1
State:
- human hand:
yellow trapezoid
- robot hand:
pink square
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
30


- red:
(empty)
- mid:
blue polygon, yellow square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE pink square red
- Human:
PLACE yellow trapezoid mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 2
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
pink square
- mid:
blue polygon, yellow square, yellow trapezoid
- green:
(empty)
- right:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK yellow trapezoid mid
- Human:
PICK blue trapezoid right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 3
State:
- human hand:
blue trapezoid
- robot hand:
yellow trapezoid
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
pink square
- mid:
blue polygon, yellow square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE yellow trapezoid red
- Human:
PLACE blue trapezoid mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 4
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
pink square, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
blue polygon, blue trapezoid, yellow square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK pink square red
- Human:
PICK blue polygon mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 5
State:
- human hand:
blue polygon
- robot hand:
pink square
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
yellow trapezoid
- mid:
blue trapezoid, yellow square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE pink square mid
- Human:
PLACE blue polygon green
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 6
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
31


- red:
yellow trapezoid
- mid:
blue trapezoid, pink square, yellow square
- green:
blue polygon
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK blue trapezoid mid
- Human:
PICK pink square mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 7
State:
- human hand:
pink square
- robot hand:
blue trapezoid
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE blue trapezoid red
- Human:
PLACE pink square green
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 8
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon, pink square
- right:
pink polygon, yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PICK pink polygon right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 9
State:
- human hand:
pink polygon
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue square, pink trapezoid
- red:
blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon, pink square
- right:
yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK blue square left
- Human:
PLACE pink polygon green
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 10
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
blue square
- left:
pink trapezoid
- red:
blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon, pink polygon, pink square
- right:
yellow polygon
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE blue square red
- Human:
PICK yellow polygon right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 11
State:
- human hand:
yellow polygon
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
pink trapezoid
32


- red:
blue square, blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon, pink polygon, pink square
- right:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK pink trapezoid left
- Human:
PLACE yellow polygon green
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 12
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
pink trapezoid
- left:
(empty)
- red:
blue square, blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
yellow square
- green:
blue polygon, pink polygon, pink square, yellow polygon
- right:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE pink trapezoid mid
- Human:
PICK yellow square mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 13
State:
- human hand:
yellow square
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
(empty)
- red:
blue square, blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
pink trapezoid
- green:
blue polygon, pink polygon, pink square, yellow polygon
- right:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK pink trapezoid mid
- Human:
PLACE yellow square green
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 14
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
pink trapezoid
- left:
(empty)
- red:
blue square, blue trapezoid, yellow trapezoid
- mid:
(empty)
- green:
blue polygon, pink polygon, pink square, yellow polygon,
yellow square
- right:
(empty)
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE pink trapezoid red
- Human:
WAIT
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Task 2:
Block-sorting goal: place all blocks into either the red bin or the green bin
Step 0
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue polygon, blue square, pink square, yellow square
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
pink polygon
- green:
(empty)
- right:
blue trapezoid, pink trapezoid, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK pink square left
- Human:
PICK blue trapezoid right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 1
33


State:
- human hand:
blue trapezoid
- robot hand:
pink square
- left:
blue polygon, blue square, yellow square
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
pink polygon
- green:
(empty)
- right:
pink trapezoid, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
WAIT
- Human:
PLACE blue trapezoid mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
negative
Step 2
State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
pink square
- left:
blue polygon, blue square, yellow square
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon
- green:
(empty)
- right:
pink trapezoid, yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE pink square mid
- Human:
PICK pink trapezoid right
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Step 3
State:
- human hand:
pink trapezoid
- robot hand:
(empty)
- left:
blue polygon, blue square, yellow square
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon, pink square
- green:
(empty)
- right:
yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PICK blue polygon left
- Human:
PLACE pink trapezoid mid
Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Current step (Task 2, Step 4):
Block-sorting goal: place all blocks into either the red bin or the green bin
- State:
- human hand:
(empty)
- robot hand:
blue polygon
- left:
blue square, yellow square
- red:
(empty)
- mid:
blue trapezoid, pink polygon, pink square, pink trapezoid
- green:
(empty)
- right:
yellow polygon, yellow trapezoid
- Executed actions:
- You (Robot):
PLACE blue polygon mid
- Human:
PICK pink polygon mid
- Human explicit feedback for your action:
positive
Latest belief over preference before incorporating the CURRENT step:
- blue square to red bin:
3/10 strong accept, 3/10 weak accept, 3/10 weak
reject, 1/10 strong reject
- blue trapezoid to red bin:
2/10 strong accept, 8/10 weak accept, 0/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- blue polygon to red bin:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 9/10 weak
reject, 1/10 strong reject
- pink square to red bin:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 5/10 weak
reject, 5/10 strong reject
- pink trapezoid to red bin:
3/10 strong accept, 7/10 weak accept, 0/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
34


- pink polygon to red bin:
0/10 strong accept, 3/10 weak accept, 7/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- yellow square to red bin:
0/10 strong accept, 0/10 weak accept, 10/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- yellow trapezoid to red bin:
1/10 strong accept, 9/10 weak accept, 0/10
weak reject, 0/10 strong reject
- yellow polygon to red bin:
0/10 strong accept, 2/10 weak accept, 8/10 weak
reject, 0/10 strong reject
- The unchosen actions:
Your unchosen actions:
PLACE blue polygon left, PLACE blue polygon red, WAIT
Human unchosen actions:
PICK pink square mid, PICK yellow polygon right,
PICK blue trapezoid mid, PICK yellow trapezoid right, PICK pink trapezoid mid,
WAIT
Now, based on the collaboration history (states, actions, human feedback), and the latest belief
over the human’s preference before the CURRENT step, predict the human feedback for each
action that you and the human did not choose, in the CURRENT step only, considering both the
task goal and the human’s preference.
Label each unchosen action as:
- accepted:
accepted behavior with respect to both task-goal progress and
inferred human preference.
- rejected:
rejected behavior with respect to task-goal progress and/or
inferred human preference.
Rules:
1) Only include unique action keys from the provided unchosen actions of you
("Robot") and the human ("Human").
2) Every label must be exactly ’accepted’ or ’rejected’.
3) Return JSON only.
Return STRICT JSON only with this shape:
{
"Robot":
{
"PLACE blue polygon left":
"accepted|rejected",
"PLACE blue polygon red":
"accepted|rejected",
"WAIT":
"accepted|rejected"
},
"Human":
{
"PICK pink square mid":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK yellow polygon right":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK blue trapezoid mid":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK yellow trapezoid right":
"accepted|rejected",
"PICK pink trapezoid mid":
"accepted|rejected",
"WAIT":
"accepted|rejected"
}
}
E
Details of the Real-World Human-Robot Collaboration Study
Prior to starting data collection, the study protocol was submitted to our local Institutional Review
Board, and was exempt from standard, full-board review because it involved a benign behavioral
intervention with adult subjects, who had to consent to taking part in the research.
E.1
Study Setup and Procedure
Participants collaborated with a robot system to assemble target pizzas at a tabletop station (Fig. 9).
The station contained three task areas: storage, workspace, and on-pizza zone. Storage contained all
candidate ingredients; the workspace served as the handoff area between the robot and participant;
and the on-pizza zone recorded ingredients that the participant had already used. The robot’s role
in the collaboration was to choose ingredients from storage and place them in the workspace. The
participant’s role was to decide which workspace ingredients to use for the target pizza and when to
use them. The workspace and on-pizza zone shared a capacity of four items, so when these areas
were full the robot first had to clear an item back to storage before it could pass another ingredient.
35


Buttons
Storage
Franka
Robot
Arm
Shutter
On-Pizza
Zone
Workspace
Figure 9: Layout of the tabletop pizza-making station in the physical human-robot collaboration study.
The robot system included two physical robots with distinct roles. The Franka Emika Panda arm
handled manipulation of the ingredient containers, with pick-and-place motions generated through
the MoveIt Task Constructor framework [52]. Shutter [53], a tabletop social robot, provided speech
and gaze cues during the interaction. Behavior trees [54] coordinated the robots’ task-level and
communicative actions.
The explicit feedback interface consisted of a green button for positive feedback and a red button
for negative feedback. Participants were instructed to base their feedback on both parts of the task:
whether the robot’s behavior helped complete the target recipe and whether it respected their selected
preference over how the pizza should be made. Participants were free to provide feedback whenever
they considered it useful; they were not required to press a button at every step.
A study session began after participants consented to take part in the study and to be audio- and
video-recorded. Participants then completed a practice pizza-making task. The practice pizza con-
tained two cheeses and two sauces, and the practice preference was to use cheese before sauce. The
practice task served to familiarize participants with the physical task, the handoff protocol, the ca-
pacity constraint of the shared workspace, and the feedback buttons. The practice was also used
to fit participant-specific rationality coefficients for inferring preferences from implicit and explicit
human feedback, ˆβimp and ˆβexp in Eq. (1), which were then used in the following pizza-making
tasks for that participant.
After practice, participants experienced two experimental conditions: preference learning per Eq. (1)
with IMPLIED, and preference learning per Eq. (1) with the Fixed-Rule implication. The order of
the conditions was counterbalanced between participants.
For each condition, the participants completed two pizza-making tasks (i.e., two trials) sequentially.
The same pizza recipes were used across both conditions, but the robot’s learned preference esti-
mate was reset between the conditions. Participants were not told which implication for preference
learning was being used by the robot in a given condition; they only knew that the robot was trying
to learn their preferences during the collaboration using two learning methods. After completing
both conditions, participants answered comparison questions about the two learning methods.
Each lab session lasted about 45 minutes, and participants were compensated US$15. Eligibility
required participants to be adults, fluent in English, and able to perceive the robot’s speech and
visual cues with normal or corrected-to-normal hearing and vision.
E.2
Pizza-Making Task Specification
Domain basics. The physical pizza-making task uses the same high-level collaboration structure as
the pizza domain described by Candon et al. [25]. There are 16 ingredients, divided into four broad
ingredient types:
36


• Sauce (4): sauce1, sauce2, sauce3, sauce4
• Cheese (4): cheese1, cheese2, cheese3, cheese4
• Meat (3): ham, pepperoni, sausage
• Veggie (5): broccoli, greenpepper, blackolive, mushroom, pineapple
The robot can access storage and the workspace, while the human can access the workspace and
on-pizza zone. A target recipe specifies how many ingredients of each goal class are needed on
the pizza. Cheese and sauce are counted by class, while the meat and veggie ingredients are counted
by their specific types (e.g., ham, pepperoni, pineapple). In each trial corresponding to making a
given pizza, the robot was given the target recipe but did not know the participant’s true preference.
The participant knew both.
State space.
The task state is represented by the allocation of ingredients across storage, the
workspace, the on-pizza zone, and the two agents’ hands. Together with the target recipe, this allo-
cation determines which goal-class counts are satisfied, which ingredients are available to the robot
or human, whether either agent is holding an ingredient, and whether the shared workspace/on-pizza
capacity is active.
Action space and transitions.
The robot’s action space has 19 actions in total:
16
PICK(ingredient) actions, PUT(ingredient, storage), PUT(ingredient, workspace),
and WAIT. If empty-handed, the robot could pick an ingredient from storage or the workspace; if
holding an ingredient, it could put the ingredient in storage or, when space was available, in the
workspace. The human’s action space has 33 actions in total: 16 PICK(ingredient) actions from
the workspace, 16 PLACE(ingredient) actions that mark a held ingredient as added to the pizza,
and WAIT. At each step, the robot and human act simultaneously. A pick action transfers an in-
gredient to the acting agent’s hand; a robot put action transfers a held ingredient to storage or the
workspace; and a human place action marks a held ingredient as used on the pizza.
Preference space. Human preferences are represented by an 8-dimensional weight vector,
w = [cheese before sauce, cheese before meat,
cheese before veggie, sauce before meat,
sauce before veggie, meat before veggie,
workspace size le1, workspace size le2]
The first six dimensions encode pairwise ordering preferences over cheese, sauce, meat, and veggie.
For example, a positive value of cheese before sauce means that all target cheese should be used
before any target sauce, while a negative value represents the reverse ordering. The last two dimen-
sions encode preferences over the number of ingredients in the workspace/on-pizza area. Weights
are normalized to unit Euclidean norm.
True preference options and environment initializations. Before the main trials, participants
selected one of six true preference options and used it consistently throughout the pizza-making
task:
• Preference A: Sauce before cheese before veggie before meat.
• Preference B: Sauce before meat before veggie.
• Preference C: Cheese before meat before sauce and veggie.
• Preference D: Veggie before meat.
• Preference E: Prefer more than two ingredients in the workspace/on-pizza area.
• Preference F: Prefer at most two ingredients in the workspace/on-pizza area.
The main trials used target recipes drawn from the following set:
• Combo Pizza: 1 cheese, 1 sauce, 1 pepperoni, 1 ham, 1 green pepper, 1 black olive.
• Hawaiian Pizza: 1 pineapple, 1 green pepper, 1 ham, 1 pepperoni, 1 cheese, 2 sauce.
• Deluxe Pizza: 1 broccoli, 1 black olive, 1 sausage, 1 pepperoni, 2 cheese, 1 sauce.
• Sausage Pizza: 2 cheese, 2 sauce, 1 sausage, 1 green pepper, 1 mushroom.
37


• Meat Pizza: 1 sausage, 1 ham, 1 pepperoni, 2 cheese, 2 sauce.
Reward function. The shared reward is decomposed into goal and preference terms:
R(s, aR, aH) = Rgoal(s, aR, aH) + γRpref(s, aR, aH),
where γ controls the relative importance of the preference reward and goal reward. The goal term is
the sum of agent-specific rewards. Each agent receives a step cost of −0.3, and completing the pizza
gives a +10 bonus. The robot is rewarded for making target ingredients available to the human:
picking a still-needed target ingredient from storage gives +2, and placing such an ingredient from
storage into the workspace gives +3. The robot is penalized for actions that do not advance the
recipe: picking a needed target that is already in the workspace or on the human side gives −2 (or
+0.5 when the shared capacity is full), picking from storage when the shared capacity is full gives
−5, moving a needed target back to storage gives −1, and cycling a target from the workspace or
human side back to the workspace gives −4. Acting on an already-satisfied target gives −3 or −5
depending on the action, except that clearing an already-used item from a full workspace gives +1.
Acting on a non-target ingredient gives −2 or −10. Waiting while holding an ingredient, or while a
needed target remains unavailable to the human, gives −5.
The human receives +2 for picking a still-needed target ingredient from the workspace and +3 for
placing it on the pizza. Picking or placing an already-satisfied target gives −5, acting on a non-target
ingredient gives −10, and attempting to place without holding an ingredient gives −2. These goal
rewards encourage the robot to stage useful ingredients for the human and encourage the human to
add only ingredients that still contribute to the target recipe.
The preference reward is linear in interpretable feature vectors:
Rpref(s, aR, aH) = w⊤ϕR(s, aR) + w⊤ϕH(s, aH) = w⊤(ϕR(s, aR) + ϕH(s, aH)).
The feature vectors ϕR and ϕH use the same eight dimensions as w. Ordering features are positive
when an action supports the preferred ingredient ordering, negative when it violates that order-
ing, and zero when the action is irrelevant. Workspace-size features evaluate whether the resulting
workspace/on-pizza occupancy is consistent with the selected occupancy preference.
E.3
Demographic Information
Participants completed a demographic survey at the beginning of the study. The statistics for the 20
participants are summarized below:
• Gender: 16 participants were male, 3 were female, and 1 was non-binary/third gender.
• Age: The participants’ mean age was 26 years old (SD = 2.1), with ages ranging from 21 to 31.
• Familiarity with robotics: Participants rated their familiarity with robotics on a 7-point Likert
scale, where 1 indicated “not familiar at all” and 7 indicated “very familiar.” The mean rating
was 4.6 (SD = 2.01).
• Frequency of interacting with robots: 7 participants reported interacting with robots less than
once a month, 4 reported once a month, 1 reported once a week, 2 reported 2–3 times a week, 3
reported 4–6 times a week, and 3 reported daily.
38
