SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
1
G R AVA GRAVA: Grounded Reasoning-to-Action
Representation and Learning for
Autonomous Driving
Xiao Liu
, Haoyu Li
, Jianghao Leng
, Lin Wang
, Member, IEEE, Chao Sun
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Driving vision-language-action (VLA) models increas-
ingly incorporate reasoning before action prediction, yet their
intermediate reasoning is often weakly grounded in physical scene
evidence and inconsistently connected to executable behavior. We
present GRAVA, a framework centered on Grounded Reasoning-
to-Action (GRA) that integrates grounding, reasoning, and
action generation within a single autoregressive stream. GRA
binds action-relevant linguistic references to 2D visual regions
and ego-centric physical states, while organizing object-specific
interactions and driving decisions in a trajectory-anchored typed
graph. Its action-relevant structure is serialized into grounded
reasoning, with bounding-box tokens and physical quantities
providing evidence for interaction and decision statements. A
single VLM generates this reasoning followed immediately by a
compact Executable Planner action, which is deterministically
decoded into a continuous trajectory. An agentic GRA data
construction pipeline combines forward scene grounding with
backward trajectory anchoring to derive consistent cognition and
planning supervision from the same graph. Using this pipeline, we
construct GR-NavSim, extending the nuPlan dataset with 2.2M
grounded question-answer pairs and 70K GRA reasoning traces.
Centered on the GRA representation, we propose a progressive
training strategy that develops grounded cognition through pre-
training, establishes the reasoning-to-action interface through
lightweight imitation, and further improves driving behavior
through reinforcement learning and exploration. Using only about
60% of the available human driving demonstrations for action
supervision, GRAVA-8B achieves state-of-the-art performance
among purely autoregressive driving models on the full NAVSIM
benchmark. On an internal long-tail benchmark, full GRA
improves key-object compliance and Closed-loop Driving Score by
19.3% and 20.5% relative to action-only prediction, respectively.
These results demonstrate the benefit of preserving action-relevant
physical evidence from grounded reasoning through executable
action generation.
Index Terms—Vision-Language-Action Models, Autonomous
Driving, Grounded Reasoning, Reasoning-to-Action, Motion
Planning.
Xiao Liu, Jianghao Leng, and Chao Sun are with the National Engineering
Research Center of Electric Vehicles, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China; the Shenzhen Automotive Research Institute, Beijing Institute
of Technology, Shenzhen 518118, China; and Shenzhen Jiguangzhijie Tech-
nology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518118, China (e-mail: bitliuxiao@gmail.com;
lengjianghao@szari.ac.cn; chaosun@bit.edu.cn). Corresponding author: Chao
Sun.
Haoyu Li is with the National Engineering Research Center of Electric
Vehicles, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and the
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore (e-mail: rabbit.yujixyz@gmail.com).
Lin Wang is with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineer-
ing, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: lin-
wang@ntu.edu.sg).
Code repository: https://github.com/AhernResearch/grava.
This work was supported by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program
(ZDCY20250901103002003).
I. INTRODUCTION
V
ISION-LANGUAGE-ACTION (VLA) models are emerg-
ing as a promising paradigm for autonomous driving by
integrating multimodal scene understanding, reasoning, and
action generation within a general-purpose generative model.
Recent driving VLAs further introduce explicit intermediate
reasoning before action prediction to support decision making
in complex and long-tail scenarios [1]–[3]. For driving, however,
reasoning must identify not only the relevant traffic participants
but also the physical states and interactions through which they
constrain the ego behavior. A vehicle ahead, for example,
affects the driving decision according to its lane occupancy,
distance, and motion state. These scene-grounded relations must
therefore remain explicitly connected to the action generated
from the reasoning.
Despite this progress, existing driving VLAs still face two
fundamental limitations, as illustrated in Fig. 1. First, we
identify a grounding gap (G1) between linguistic reasoning
and physical scene evidence. Action-relevant entities are
often described through free-form language or high-level
semantics without explicitly resolving them to visual regions
and corresponding metric states. Consequently, a semantically
plausible rationale may remain detached from the physical
objects, distances, and motions that constrain the ego behavior.
Second, we identify a reasoning-to-action fragmentation gap
(G2). Even when grounding is available, it is often introduced
through dedicated perception or question-answering tasks, while
reasoning and planning are learned from separate supervision
or implemented through separate functional modules. The
grounded objects and states established in one task are therefore
not necessarily preserved as the evidence supporting subsequent
interaction reasoning, decision making, and action generation.
Addressing these limitations requires both explicit grounding
of the reasoning content and continuity of that content through
to executable behavior.
Establishing this continuity requires a representation that
organizes scene evidence according to its role in the driv-
ing decision. Scene relevance is action dependent: visually
salient objects are not necessarily those that constrain the
demonstrated ego behavior, and different objects may impose
distinct interaction requirements. Explicit visual references
and physical states must therefore be connected to the object-
specific interactions and decisions they support, rather than
retained only as isolated perception attributes. This motivates an
action-grounded representation that preserves the dependencies
arXiv:2609.15169v1  [cs.CV]  14 Sep 2026


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
2
Two stopped vehicles ahead
One lies on the ego route
Which object should
determine the action?
A. Reasoning without explicit spatial grounding · CoT / CoC
VLM
“The vehicle ahead is stopped.
The ego should decelerate.”
DECELERATE
trajectory
No explicit image grunding or physical state
B. Grounding / perception and action as auxiliary tasks or modules
Auxiliary task
Grounding QA
/ cognitive VLM
diffusion planner
trajectory
Separate modules
shared VLM features
 perception head
Planning Expert
trajectory
GRAVA · Grounding, reasoning, and action in one causal sequence
GROUNDING
INTERACTION
DECISION
ACTION
One causal stream: grounding → reasoning → action
Vehicle <|box_start|>(435,473),
(587,720)<|box_end|>
is stopped 15 meters ahead in
the same lane ...
The vehicle constrains the ego
vehicle's speed and following
distance. Ego must decelerate
to maintain safe separation.
lateral: keep_lane
longitudinal:
decelerate
{"planner":"CRAWL",
"gear":"D",
"params":{"points":[...]}}
One Autoregressive VLM
?
?
✓
C.
Fig. 1. Grounding and reasoning-to-action gaps in driving VLAs. (A) Reasoning without explicit visual grounding. (B) Grounding separated from action
generation through auxiliary tasks or modules. (C) GRAVA connects grounded evidence, interaction reasoning, decisions, and executable actions within one
autoregressive stream.
from physical scene evidence through reasoning to the final
ego behavior.
To address this problem, we present GRAVA, a framework
centered on the Grounded Reasoning-to-Action (GRA)
representation. GRA organizes action-relevant scene context,
grounded objects, physical states, interactions, decisions, and
planning anchors within a trajectory-anchored typed graph.
Each action-relevant linguistic referent is explicitly associated
with its 2D visual region and ego-centric physical state,
while object-specific interaction paths trace how this evidence
contributes to the driving decision. The action-relevant graph
structure is serialized into grounded reasoning in which
bounding-box tokens and physical quantities remain associated
with the interaction and decision statements they support. A
single autoregressive VLM generates this reasoning followed
immediately by a compact Executable Planner action, which
is deterministically decoded into a continuous trajectory. GRA
thus organizes the dependencies within the reasoning, while
serialization and action generation carry them through the
same autoregressive stream. Grounding becomes part of the
reasoning used to generate the action, rather than an auxiliary
task separated from downstream behavior.
Learning this grounded reasoning-to-action process requires
supervision that preserves the same physical evidence and
reasoning dependencies. GRAVA therefore employs a tool-
augmented multi-agent annotation pipeline that combines
forward scene grounding with backward trajectory anchoring.
Forward grounding identifies candidate scene elements and
establishes their visual and physical states, whereas backward
anchoring starts from the expert trajectory and traces the
demonstrated behavior back to the critical objects, interactions,
and decisions that support it. Cognition-oriented question an-
swering and planning-oriented reasoning-to-action supervision
are derived as different projections of the resulting GRA graph,
maintaining consistent object identities, physical states, and
interaction semantics across the two forms of supervision.
Grounded concepts learned through individual questions thus
reappear within the reasoning that supports executable action
generation.
Based on this supervision, GRAVA adopts a GRA-aligned
learning process that progressively connects grounded cog-
nition to executable behavior. GRA pre-training establishes
reference resolution, physical-state understanding, interaction
reasoning, and decision semantics. Lightweight planner warm-
up then learns to generate executable actions as continuations
of grounded reasoning, and verified self-distillation further
stabilizes valid model-generated reasoning. Finally, an Active
RL Loop optimizes complete reasoning-to-action sequences
using trajectory-level driving rewards. By repeatedly selecting
recoverable scenarios in which high-reward behavior is already
reachable but not yet reliable, Active RL concentrates policy
refinement on unresolved scenarios while retaining grounded
reasoning and action as a single optimization unit.
Our contributions are threefold:
• We propose Grounded Reasoning-to-Action (GRA),
an action-grounded representation that binds linguistic
references to 2D visual evidence and ego-centric physical
states, while organizing their interactions and decisions
in a trajectory-anchored typed graph. Its action-relevant
structure is serialized into grounded reasoning followed by


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
3
an Executable Planner action, preserving the progression
from physical evidence to executable behavior within one
autoregressive stream.
• We develop a GRA-aligned pre-training and post-
training strategy that progressively learns and optimizes
this reasoning-to-action process. Grounded pre-training,
planner warm-up, and verified self-distillation establish the
transition from scene understanding to executable action
generation, while the Active RL Loop refines complete
sequences using driving outcomes on policy-dependent
recoverable scenarios.
• We develop an agentic GRA data construction pipeline
and use it to build GR-NavSim, a vision-language
alignment dataset based on nuPlan, comprising 2.2M
grounded question-answer pairs and 70K GRA reasoning
traces. To the best of our knowledge, GR-NavSim is
the largest open-vocabulary, non-template-based question-
answering dataset for autonomous driving to date.
We instantiate GRAVA-8B from Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [4].
Under the full NAVSIM protocol, GRAVA achieves 90.48
PDMS, improving by 10.2% relative to its pre-RL check-
point and achieving the best performance among the directly
autoregressive driving VLAs considered in our comparison.
On an internal long-tail benchmark, full GRA improves key-
object compliance and Closed-loop Driving Score by 19.3%
and 20.5% relative to action-only prediction, respectively.
Controlled reasoning interventions further show that replacing
low-reward GRA reasoning with higher-quality grounded rea-
soning directly changes the generated action and substantially
improves trajectory quality. These results support the central
premise of GRAVA: action-relevant physical evidence should
be explicitly grounded within the reasoning and preserved
through interaction analysis, decision making, and executable
action generation.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Grounded Reasoning in Driving VLAs
Grounded vision-language learning associates linguistic
concepts with observable visual evidence. Visual Genome
and GQA provide object-, relation-, and scene-graph-based
supervision [5], [6], while MDETR and Grounding DINO
explicitly connect language expressions to image regions [7],
[8]. Region-aware multimodal models further support localized
referring, question answering, and spatial reasoning [9]–[11].
These studies establish the visual reference resolution and
spatial understanding capabilities needed to ground reasoning
in scene evidence.
Driving VLMs and VLAs extend these capabilities toward
reasoning about ego behavior. EMMA [1] jointly models
scene understanding and trajectory generation, DriveLM [12]
organizes driving cognition through graph-structured visual
question answering, and DriveVLM [13], LMDrive [14],
and Senna [15] introduce language-based reasoning or high-
level decisions into planning. More recent methods explic-
itly incorporate physical grounding and interaction structure.
OpenDriveVLA [2] uses 2D and 3D instance-aware represen-
tations with agent–environment–ego interactions, Alpamayo-
R1 [16] constructs decision-grounded Chain-of-Causation
traces, ReCogDrive [17] develops hierarchical cognition before
planning, and DriveAgent-R1 [18] invokes perception tools to
ground decisions in visual evidence.
These approaches strengthen the connection between scene
understanding and driving reasoning. GRA focuses on pre-
serving action-relevant evidence throughout that reasoning:
visual references and physical states remain associated with
the object-specific interactions and decisions they support. Its
trajectory-anchored graph organizes these dependencies, and
its serialization retains them within the reasoning sequence
that precedes executable action generation.
B. Reasoning-to-Action Representation
End-to-end autonomous driving has progressed from direct
control and trajectory regression [19]–[21] toward object-
centric, bird’s-eye-view, vectorized, and sparse representations
that expose spatial structure to planning [22]–[27]. Diffusion
and autoregressive planners further model multimodal trajec-
tories and sequential motion [28]–[30]. For driving VLAs,
the action interface must additionally connect language-based
reasoning to continuous vehicle motion.
One approach retains a specialized trajectory generator along-
side the VLM. DriveVLM [13] and Senna [15] use dedicated
planning modules, ReCogDrive [17] couples cognition with
a diffusion planner, and DriveVLA-W0 [31] introduces a
lightweight action expert after world-model learning. Qwen-
Drive-1.0 [32] integrates 3D perception and driving VQA
within a shared VLM while generating trajectories through
an external Planning Expert. These designs provide driving-
specific motion generation through a learned module distinct
from the autoregressive reasoning stream.
An alternative represents agent states, trajectories, or controls
directly as token sequences [33]–[37]. AutoVLA [3] dis-
cretizes trajectories through an action codebook, while Curious-
VLA [38] improves autoregressive trajectory generation through
step-wise normalization and exploration. Related work also ex-
plicitly addresses language–action consistency: SimLingo [39]
aligns visual question answering with closed-loop behavior,
LinkVLA [40] links language and action through a shared
discrete codebook, and Neuro-Symbolic Drive [41] derives
rule-grounded reasoning traces from executable planners.
GRAVA follows the direct-action paradigm with a primitive-
specific interface. The VLM generates an Executable Planner
action immediately after grounded reasoning, and a fixed
geometric decoder converts its parameters into continuous
waypoints. The learned action choice therefore remains within
πθ(a | x, r), while geometric realization requires no additional
learned trajectory policy.
C. Data Construction for Grounded Driving VLAs
Large-scale driving datasets such as BDD100K, nuScenes,
Waymo Open, and nuPlan provide supervision for perception,
prediction, and planning [42]–[45]. Language-oriented datasets
extend this supervision toward command grounding and visual
question answering [46]–[48]. DriveLM [12] organizes driving
questions through graph dependencies, while NuPlanQA [49]


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
4
A. GRA Agentic Data Pipeline
B. GRAVA Model
C1. GRA QAs Data 
C2. Planning / Decision Data 
D1. GRA Pretraining
D2. Post Training with Active RL
Agent Toolbox
camera
2D det
3D state
BEV
ego state
trajectory plot
sign / OCR
case recall
Multi-Agent Annotation
scene grounding
interaction
backtrace 
trajectory backtrace
shared grounded evidence
Planning / Decision Reasoning
Planning / Decision reasoning
<think>
... center lane ... straight navigation intent.
<|box_start|>(386,500),
(529,738)<|box_end|> ... a black SUV
... same lane ... [-0.52, 14.70], 14.7m
... stopped at 0.0 m/s
... directly blocks the ego path ...
... maintains its lane position while decelerating to
a crawl speed ...
Adjacent lane vehicles ... do not affect the ego
maneuver.
/ hi k
...
decision/planning 
key object set
Prompts
ego state + command
history trajectory
planner schema
Vision-Language Model
t1
t2
t3
...
p1
Executable Planner
STOP
CRAWL
CURVE
CRUISE
 trajectory
tn
p2
p3
thinking token
planner params token
...
CRUISE
progress 10.5 m
offset 0.03 m
CURVE
P1 · P2 · P3
continuous arc
...
Scene
... approaching an intersection (141.6m
ahead)
... center straight lane
... forming an orderly queue
... proceed straight along the navigation path
ObjectPerception
Critical obstacle
<|box_start|>(420,452),
(533,639)<|box_end|>
... navigation path at 21.1m ...
stopped
Planner output
CRAWL · D
8 pts · x = −0.40 m
y = 1.30 → … → 5.30 m
ObjectInteraction
<|box_start|>(420,452), ...
Occupies the straight navigation route ...
ObjectInteraction
<|box_start|>(118,497), ...
14.2m ... left adjacent lane
... safe lateral margin maintenance
Large-scale GRA data
Scene
context
Object
grounding
Interaction
grounding
GRA Pretraining
shared VLM
Perception
Reference
resolution
Interaction
Decision
Light SFT warmup
reasoning + planner
Self-distillation
Active RL
GRPO
K rollouts
Planner run
Driving reward
Active-set
update
30+ QA
per scene
Large GRA Pretrain QAs
▣
◉
□→□
SUV
□↔□
↝
Fig. 2. Overview of GRAVA. (A) Agentic GRA graph construction through forward grounding and backward trajectory anchoring. (B) Autoregressive grounded
reasoning and Executable Planner action generation, followed by fixed trajectory decoding. (C1–C2) Cognition and planning supervision derived from the same
GRA graph. (D1–D2) Progressive training from grounded pre-training to Active RL.
provides multi-view scene-understanding and ego-centric rea-
soning supervision. NuScenes-QA further demonstrates how
scene graphs constructed from existing 3D annotations can
support scalable question-answer generation. Together, these
datasets establish structured sources of driving cognition
supervision.
Automated and model-assisted pipelines increasingly extend
such supervision to driving reasoning. Alpamayo-R1 [16] con-
structs decision-grounded Chain-of-Causation traces through
automatic and human-in-the-loop annotation, while ReCog-
Drive [17] uses a hierarchical cognition-data pipeline with
generation, refinement, and quality control. These approaches
improve the scale and organization of reasoning data. For
learning a continuous reasoning-to-action process, a central
consideration is how the grounded concepts acquired through
cognition supervision remain consistent with the evidence used
in planning targets.
The agentic GRA data construction pipeline addresses this
cross-task consistency through a shared trajectory-anchored
graph. Forward grounding establishes visual references and
physical states, while backward trajectory anchoring identifies
the objects, interactions, and decisions relevant to the demon-
strated behavior. Cognition-oriented questions and planning-
oriented reasoning sequences are derived from the same graph,
preserving their object identities and decision semantics. The
distinction lies in using the same grounded contents both as
individual cognition targets and as the evidence supporting
executable action learning.
Complementary
evaluation
work
extends
trajectory-
displacement measures toward closed-loop and pseudo-closed-
loop driving quality [50]–[53], providing behavioral criteria
alongside language-oriented supervision.
D. Training Strategies for Driving VLAs
Training driving VLAs requires adapting general-purpose
vision-language capabilities to driving behavior. Supervised
fine-tuning learns scene understanding, reasoning, and action
prediction from annotated examples [1], [2]. In imitation-
centered training, the driving policy is primarily optimized to
reproduce demonstrated behavior. This provides a direct route
to acquiring driving skills, while its susceptibility to distribution
shift motivates interactive imitation-learning methods such as
DAgger [54].
A broader training strategy first establishes driving cognition
and then adapts it to planning. ReCogDrive [17] adopts driving-
specific pre-training followed by planner imitation and rein-
forcement learning. Qwen-Drive-1.0 [32] similarly combines
perception and VQA adaptation with subsequent Planning
Expert training and reward-based refinement. These staged
systems distinguish the acquisition of scene-understanding
capabilities from the optimization of driving behavior. Comple-
mentary self-training and reasoning-distillation methods reuse
verified model-generated outputs to extend supervision beyond
the original annotations [55], [56].
Within such training systems, RL and preference-based post-
training support further policy improvement beyond supervised


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
5
A.  Structured Node Chain  
◉ Scene context
description · traffic
sign
navigation · congestion
↗ Trajectory
analysis
intent · nav interaction
obstacle interaction · map
interaction
critical objects
GT trajectory 
obj_N ...
▣ Object grounding
intention · nav interaction
object interaction · 
map interaction
ego interaction · supplementary
obj_N decision ...
◆ Object decision
decision · chain · reason
✓ Ego decision
answer · chain ·
reason
▶ Planning
trajectory · chain ·
reason
  B. GRA Graph 
forward trace
route to object centric agent
backward trace
B1. Action-relevant GRA subgraph
◉ SCENE | ↗ TRAJECTORY
▣ OBJECT GROUNDING
✓ EGO DECISION
⇄ INTERACTIONS
▶ PLANNING
scene_context.navigation
STRAIGHT
trajectory.intent
keep_lane, decelerate
◆ OBJECT DECISIONS
scene_context.congestion
queueing before 
stop line
G.ego_interaction
decel + follow
G.motion_state
stopped; 15.0 m
G.map_interaction
same lane; x = 0.18 m
L.object_interaction
queued alongside G
L.ego_interaction
lateral hazard
L.decision
Caution
ego_decision
keep_lane,
decelerate
L.map_interaction
right adjacent lane
L.motion_state
stopped; 0.0 m/s
G.decision
Follow
… M.decision
Yield
planning.trajectory
executable
action
B2. Serialize the action-relevant subgraph: r = Ser(Ga) ↓
≡ Grounded reasoning:  ... Vehicle <|box_start|>(434,478),(586,725)<|box_end|> is stopped 15 meters ahead in the same lane. ... As the leading vehicle, it
constrains the ego vehicle's speed and following distance; ego must decelerate and follow it. ... Vehicle <|box_start|>(603,480),(828,757)<|box_end|> is
stopped in the adjacent right lane and requires lateral caution. ... Therefore, the ego decision is keep_lane and decelerate.
▶ Planning:  minimal lateral deviation; longitudinal step spacing decreases from 1.06 m to 0.24 m → planning.trajectory.
Fig. 3. GRA graph structure and serialization. (A) Semantic node types and their organization. (B1) Object-specific reasoning paths converge at the ego
decision and connect to the action anchor. (B2) The action-relevant subgraph is serialized into grounded reasoning with visual references and physical states,
followed by the planning target.
imitation [57]–[59]. Group-relative optimization, asymmetric
policy updates, and entropy regulation provide mechanisms
for learning from sampled outcomes [60]–[62]. In driving, Al-
phaDrive [63] applies group-relative optimization to reasoning,
Gen-Drive [64] combines reward modeling with diffusion-
policy fine-tuning, and AutoVLA [3] uses reinforcement fine-
tuning for end-to-end VLA planning. Curious-VLA [38] further
addresses policy narrowing after imitation through iterative
exploration and sample refresh.
GRAVA emphasizes grounded cognition pre-training fol-
lowed by lightweight planner imitation and reinforcement-
driven exploration. GRA pre-training establishes the grounded
concepts used in reasoning, while planner warm-up learns their
continuation into executable actions. Verified self-distillation
stabilizes model-generated reasoning before Active RL explores
and optimizes complete [r; a] sequences according to decoded
trajectory outcomes. Imitation thus establishes the initial
reasoning-to-action interface, while RL refines behavior on
policy-dependent recoverable scenarios where high-reward
actions are reachable but not yet reliable.
III. THE GRAVA FRAMEWORK
A. Overview and GRA Formulation
GRAVA generates a driving action by first identifying the
relevant visual evidence and physical states, reasoning about
how they constrain the ego vehicle, and then expressing the
resulting decision as an executable action. Grounding is part of
this reasoning process: an object’s visual reference, distance,
and motion state appear alongside the interactions and decisions
they support. A single autoregressive VLM generates the
grounded reasoning and the subsequent action, as illustrated
in Fig. 2.
Grounded Reasoning-to-Action (GRA) defines how this
information is organized. Its graph links scene context and
grounded object evidence to interactions and driving decisions;
its serialization expresses those dependencies as a reasoning
sequence that the VLM can learn and generate. The graph thus
specifies the structure of the reasoning, while the text is its
sequential realization. We first describe this generation process,
then explain how graph-derived supervision and staged learning
establish it.
Given visual observation Venv, ego state sego, and navigation
command c, the model input is x = (Venv, sego, c). Let Ga
denote the action-relevant GRA subgraph and r = Ser(Ga) its
grounded reasoning sequence. Bounding-box tokens identify
relevant visual regions, physical attributes describe object states,
and interaction and decision statements explain their influence
on ego behavior.
After generating r, the VLM predicts an Executable Planner
action a = (p, g, ϕ), where p is the motion primitive, g the
gear, and ϕ the primitive-specific parameters. The complete
sequence y = [r; a] is generated autoregressively with the


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
6
factorization
πθ(y | x) = πθ(r | x)πθ(a | x, r).
(1)
The two factors describe a continuous information flow. The
reasoning sequence introduces grounded objects and explains
their behavioral relevance; the action is then generated with that
reasoning in context. GRA addresses the grounding gap (G1)
through the content and organization of r, and the reasoning-to-
action fragmentation gap (G2) by learning a as its continuation
within the same policy.
A fixed geometric decoder converts the action into a
continuous trajectory:
ˆτ = Dp (g, ϕ; sego) .
(2)
The decoder has no learnable parameters; the VLM selects the
action, and Dp realizes its geometry.
Training supervision is derived from a target graph con-
structed offline:
G∗= A (x, τ ∗, z) ,
(3)
where τ ∗is the expert trajectory, z denotes privileged an-
notation evidence, and A is the agentic graph-construction
process. Queries of G∗provide cognition-oriented QA targets,
while its action-relevant paths provide reasoning targets paired
with expert-derived planner actions. These targets teach the
model both the individual grounded concepts and their use in
a complete driving decision.
Section III-D describes how staged learning builds this
capability and then improves it using driving outcomes. The
graph-construction process is used offline; at inference, GRAVA
receives only x and directly generates [r; a]. Neither an expert
trajectory τ ∗nor privileged evidence z is required to produce
the reasoning and action.
B. Grounded Reasoning-to-Action Representation
GRA organizes scene evidence according to its role in
the driving decision. In the example in Fig. 3, a vehicle is
stopped 15 m ahead in the ego lane. Its visual region identifies
which vehicle is being discussed; its motion state and lane
relation explain why it constrains forward motion; the resulting
interaction calls for deceleration and following. A vehicle in
the adjacent right lane imposes a different constraint, requiring
lateral caution. GRA keeps these object-specific reasoning paths
distinct before combining them into the ego decision.
The representation is trajectory anchored: the demonstrated
behavior determines which scene evidence and relations are
retained. We describe its node types and dependencies, explain
how the graph is constructed, and then show how its contents
become grounded reasoning and training supervision.
1) Typed Grounded Reasoning Graph: The nodes represent
semantic contents such as navigation intent, object motion state,
interaction, and decision. Figure 3 makes these contents explicit
through fields such as scene_context.navigation,
G.motion_state, and G.ego_interaction. Directed
edges organize their dependencies from grounded evidence
to object-level responses and the final ego decision. For each
scene, this typed directed acyclic graph is defined as
G = (V, E, ν, η),
(4)
where V denotes the node set, E ⊆V × V the directed edge
set, and ν and η specify the corresponding node and edge
types. The node set is decomposed as
V = V S ˙∪V O ˙∪V Ψ ˙∪V D ˙∪{vδ, va},
(5)
where V S contains scene- and route-context nodes, V O
contains grounded object nodes, V Ψ contains interaction nodes,
and V D contains object-level decision nodes. The ego-level
decision node vδ aggregates the responses induced by individual
action-relevant objects into the final driving decision, while va
serves as the terminal action anchor. The action anchor marks
the endpoint of the grounded reasoning structure but does not
itself contain the parameters of the Executable Planner.
The grounding information associated with an object con-
nects its visual reference to the physical states used in
subsequent reasoning. We collect this information in the object
node oi, writing, for each action-relevant object i,
oi = (mi, bi, σi),
(6)
where mi denotes its linguistic reference, bi ∈[0, 1000)4 is its
normalized 2D bounding box, and σi denotes its ego-centric
physical state. The state σi contains the semantic category and
attributes such as relative position, distance, speed, and heading.
The bounding box resolves which visible object a statement
concerns; its physical state provides the information needed
to reason about the object’s effect on driving. Both remain
associated with the object when it appears in later interaction
and decision statements.
Let C denote the set of critical objects whose states or
interactions constrain the demonstrated ego behavior. For each
i ∈C, object-specific reasoning proceeds from scene context
and grounded object evidence through one or more interaction
nodes to an object-level decision:
(V S, oi) −→{ψℓ
i}ℓ−→di,
i ∈C.
(7)
The resulting object-level decisions are subsequently combined
at the ego level:
(V S, {di}i∈C) −→vδ −→va.
(8)
In the running example, the lead-vehicle branch contributes the
need to decelerate and follow, while the adjacent-vehicle branch
contributes lateral caution. Their combination supports the ego
decision to keep the lane and decelerate. The branch-and-merge
topology records which object supports each response before
the responses are combined.
To prevent reasoning statements from becoming detached
from observable evidence, GRA imposes structural grounding
constraints. Every retained interaction or object-level decision
must be traceable to at least one grounded object:
∀v ∈V Ψ ∪V D,
AncG(v) ∩V O̸ = ∅,
(9)
where AncG(v) denotes the ancestor set of node v in G. Each
object-level decision must also contribute to the ego-level
decision:
∀di ∈V D,
di −→vδ,
(10)
and the ego-level decision must ultimately reach the action
anchor:
vδ −→va.
(11)


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
7
TABLE I
EXECUTABLE PLANNER ACTION SCHEMA AND PRIMITIVE-SPECIFIC
PARAMETER SPACES Φp IN THE EGO FRAME.
Primitive p Parameters ϕ ∈Φp Shape Motion regime
STOP
endpoint
R2
near-stationary or stop-
ping motion
CRAWL
points
R8×2 low-speed stop-and-go
CURVE
p1, p2, p3
R3×2 turning
and
high-
curvature motion
CRUISE
progress end,
vend, lat end
R3
lane keeping and car
following
where −→denotes directed path reachability. These constraints
connect each retained interaction or object-level decision to
grounded object evidence and link the object-level decisions
to the final ego action anchor.
2) Trajectory-Anchored Graph Construction: The offline
construction process in Eq. (3) combines two directions,
illustrated in Fig. 2. Forward scene grounding establishes what
is present: it identifies candidate traffic participants and scene
elements and associates them with visual regions and physical
states. This produces the evidence represented by V S and V O,
but does not by itself determine which objects constrain the
demonstrated action.
Backward trajectory anchoring establishes behavioral rel-
evance: starting from the expert trajectory τ ∗, it traces the
demonstrated behavior back to the critical objects, interactions,
and decisions that support it. In the running example, the lead
vehicle’s stopped state and same-lane position provide the
evidence for the deceleration-and-following response. Linking
that response back to the grounded object makes its role in
the demonstrated behavior explicit.
Together, the two directions connect observable scene
evidence with action-relevant reasoning. Objects and relations
that do not contribute to the demonstrated decision are excluded
from the action-relevant structure. The resulting G∗records
the grounded states, interactions, and decisions from which the
learning targets are derived. Privileged evidence is used only
in offline construction and training.
3) Action-Relevant Graph Serialization: Serialization makes
the graph’s reasoning structure available to an autoregressive
VLM. It expresses grounded states, interactions, and decisions
in their dependency order, so that the model learns how physical
evidence leads to a driving response. Let AncG(va) denote
the strict ancestor set of the action anchor. We extract the
action-relevant reasoning subgraph as
Ga = G[AncG(va)],
(12)
where G[·] denotes the induced subgraph. The corresponding
grounded reasoning sequence is obtained as
r = Ser(Ga).
(13)
Serialization follows the topological structure of Ga.
Grounded objects are introduced with their linguistic references,
normalized bounding-box tokens, and physical states. Subse-
quent statements retain the object references while describing
interactions and object-level decisions, before converging at
the ego decision.
Figure 3(B2) illustrates this transition for the running
example. The text first identifies the lead vehicle by its
bounding box and states that it is stopped 15 m ahead in the
same lane. It then explains how that vehicle constrains speed
and following distance, retains the adjacent vehicle’s lateral
constraint, and concludes with lane keeping and deceleration.
The graph nodes thus become connected reasoning statements,
with the visual references and physical quantities embedded in
the reasoning itself.
The action anchor itself is not included in the reasoning
sequence r. Instead, as defined in Sec. III-A, the Executable
Planner action a is generated immediately after r. The complete
progression is therefore
Ga −→r −→a −→ˆτ.
(14)
This progression describes how the graph organizes the target
reasoning and how that reasoning leads into action generation.
At inference, the VLM directly generates the sequence: it intro-
duces the grounded evidence, reasons about its consequences,
and continues with the planner action. Section III-C details the
action representation and its trajectory decoder.
4) Shared Cognition and Planning Supervision: The target
graph supports two complementary forms of supervision.
Cognition-oriented questions teach the model to identify and
reason about individual parts of the structure; planning-oriented
sequences teach it to use those contents together to produce
an action. For cognition pre-training, graph queries sample
a question q and answer u concerning grounded objects,
physical states, interaction relations, or driving decisions. The
corresponding objective is
LQA = −E(x,q,u) [log πθ(u | x, q)] .
(15)
For planning-oriented learning, the action-relevant portion
of the same target graph is serialized as
r∗= Ser(G∗
a),
(16)
and paired with the corresponding target Executable Planner
action a∗. The planning objective is
Lplan = −E(x,r∗,a∗) [log πθ ([r∗; a∗] | x)] .
(17)
Both objectives use the object identities, physical states,
interactions, and decisions recorded in G∗. Grounding learned
through a local question therefore appears again as part of the
reasoning that supports an action. Shared supervision connects
the acquisition of individual cognition capabilities to their use
in the full reasoning-to-action sequence.
C. Executable Planner
Grounded reasoning explains how the scene constrains the
ego behavior; the next step is to express that behavior as
vehicle motion. The Executable Planner provides the action
vocabulary for this continuation. The VLM selects a motion
primitive and its parameters immediately after generating r, and
a fixed geometric decoder converts this structured action into
a trajectory. This keeps the transition from reasoning to action


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
8
(a) Training Stability: Pretrain to Planning SFT
(b) Active RL Dynamics
(c) Four-stage training pipeline
1
Grounded Pretrain
grounded QAs + reasoning
referents + interaction
2
Light SFT
planner warmup
valid planner call,
reason -> action
3
Self-Distillation
best-of-K oracle trace
compact SFT distribution
before RL
Active RL Loop
active set + GRPO
dynamic
rollout
score
resample
GRPO
update
lift top-1 PDMS
82.10 -> 90.48
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Training Step
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Loss
GRA pretrain
Planning
post-train
with GRA pretrain
cold start
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Cumulative RL Steps
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
NAVSIM PDMS
on-policy window: 200 to 50 steps
train past the window
progress–safety reward hacking
loop 1
200
loop 2
100
loop 3
50
loop 4
50
loop 5
50
loop 6
50
active RL loop
refresh edge
past window (no refresh)
on-policy window
0.8210
0.8450
0.8640
0.8714
0.8830
0.8922
0.9048
Fig. 4. Progressive training and Active RL dynamics of GRAVA. (a) Training loss with GRA pre-training and with planner training from a cold start (dashed).
(b) Greedy NAVSIM PDMS across Active RL loops; shaded regions mark on-policy optimization windows. (c) Grounded pre-training, planner warm-up,
verified self-distillation, and Active RL.
within the same autoregressive policy while allowing different
motion regimes to use different geometric parameterizations.
The compact action is a = (p, g, ϕ). The primitive set P
comprises STOP, CRAWL, CURVE, and CRUISE, with gear
g ∈M = {D, R} and parameters ϕ ∈Φp. The executable
action space is
Aexec =
[
p∈P
({p} × M × Φp) .
(18)
Table I summarizes the primitive-specific parameterizations.
STOP represents near-stationary or stopping motion; CRAWL
retains waypoint-level flexibility for irregular low-speed stop-
and-go motion; CURVE describes turning and high-curvature
trajectories; and CRUISE expresses lane-following and car-
following motion through terminal motion variables.
The action is serialized as a continuation of the grounded
reasoning:
Ser(a) = {planner : p, gear : g, params : ϕ}.
(19)
The fixed decoder in Eq. (2) converts a valid action into an eight-
waypoint trajectory ˆτ ∈R8×2 over a 4-s horizon. Because the
decoder has no learnable parameters, action selection remains
in πθ(a | x, r), with the grounded evidence and decisions in
context. The Executable Planner is an action representation,
not an additional learned planning policy.
1) Supervised Action Target Construction: During super-
vised learning, the target planner action a∗= (p∗, g∗, ϕ∗) is
deterministically derived from the expert trajectory τ ∗. The
target encoder first assigns the motion primitive p∗according to
the expert motion profile and navigation command, determines
the driving gear g∗from the motion direction, and then fits only
the parameters associated with the corresponding parameter
space Φp∗. The resulting parameters ϕ∗are quantized and
serialized together with p∗and g∗to form the action tokens
appended to the target grounded reasoning sequence r∗.
This target construction preserves the flexibility of each mo-
tion regime: CRAWL retains eight waypoints for irregular low-
speed motion, while STOP, CURVE, and CRUISE use lower-
dimensional parameters. Combined with the graph-derived
reasoning, it yields the supervised sequence y∗= [r∗; a∗],
which teaches action prediction as a continuation of grounded
reasoning.
D. Learning Grounded Reasoning-to-Action
GRAVA learns the reasoning-to-action process in stages, as
illustrated in Fig. 4. GRA pre-training develops grounded cog-
nition from graph-derived questions. Planner warm-up connects
that cognition to executable actions through complete reasoning-
to-action targets. Verified self-distillation then incorporates
valid model-generated reasoning, and Active RL optimizes
the resulting sequences using the driving outcomes of their
decoded actions.
a) Grounded pre-training and planner warm-up: GRA
pre-training uses the cognition objective in Eq. (15) to learn
scene understanding, reference resolution, physical-state rea-
soning, interactions, and decision semantics. Planner warm-up
then uses the sequence objective in Eq. (17) to learn how these
contents support an executable action. Because both forms
of supervision are derived from GRA, the grounded concepts
learned through individual questions reappear in the reasoning
that precedes the planner output.
Supervision establishes this mapping, but driving outcomes
provide a further criterion for choosing among model-generated


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
9
sequences. Different actions can be geometrically plausible
yet differ in safety, progress, and interaction behavior. The
following stages first retain verified model-generated reasoning
and then refine the complete [r; a] sequence according to the
quality of its decoded trajectory.
b) Verified self-distillation: Starting from the planner
warm-up checkpoint, GRAVA samples complete reasoning-
to-action sequences yi = [ri; ai]. Candidates are selected
according to the closed-loop driving rewards of their decoded
trajectories. For each retained sample, the distilled target is
defined as
y+
i = [r+
i ; a+
i ],
(20)
where r+
i and a+
i denote the reasoning and Executable Planner
action from the same reward-selected rollout. The resulting
checkpoint initializes Active RL and serves as its frozen
reference policy.
c) Active RL: selecting recoverable scenarios: Active RL
focuses on scenes where the current model can discover a good
action but does not yet produce it reliably. Such recoverable
scenarios provide contrasting reasoning-to-action sequences
for the same observation: some lead to high-reward behavior,
while others lead to substantially worse outcomes. For each
input x, the current policy generates K complete rollouts
{yi = [ri; ai]}K
i=1. Each valid planner action ai = (pi, gi, ϕi)
is deterministically decoded and evaluated using the driving
reward
si = R(Dpi(gi, ϕi; sego); x) .
(21)
We first identify scenarios that remain insufficiently solved
under the policy’s greedy output:
Dg(θ) = {x : sgreedy(x) < τg} .
(22)
Within this candidate pool, a scenario is retained only when
its sampled rollouts contain a sufficiently good solution, a sub-
stantially worse alternative, and meaningful reward variation:
Dact(θ) =


x ∈Dg(θ)

maxi si ≥τhi,
mini si < τlo,
stdi(si) ≥τσ


.
(23)
The high-reward criterion selects scenes where improved
behavior is reachable; the low-reward and variance criteria
retain scenes where sampled outcomes still differ substantially.
Together with the greedy filter, they identify where a successful
sampled behavior has yet to become a reliable policy output.
All candidate rollouts are generated by GRAVA itself, so this
selection requires no additional action teacher.
d) Outcome-based reasoning-to-action optimization: For
NAVSIM, R is defined as the PDMS of the trajectory decoded
from each generated Executable Planner action. Outputs that
cannot be parsed or violate the predefined executable schema
receive zero reward. Active RL therefore evaluates generated
actions according to their final driving outcomes rather than
supervising motion primitives or planner parameters with
manually designed intermediate rewards.
Because every rollout contains both grounded reasoning ri
and executable action ai, the trajectory-level reward provides
outcome feedback for the complete sequence yi = [ri; ai].
Let ¯s and σs denote the mean and standard deviation of the
rewards within a rollout group. The normalized group-relative
advantage is
ˆAi = si −¯s
σs + ϵ,
(24)
where ϵ > 0 provides numerical stability. For token yi,t, the
importance ratio between the updated policy and the frozen
behavior policy that generated the rollout is
ρi,t(θ) =
πθ(yi,t | x, yi,<t)
πθold(yi,t | x, yi,<t).
(25)
Following DAPO-style asymmetric clipping [60], [61], the
token-level objective is
ℓi,t(θ) = min
n
ρi,t(θ) ˆAi,
clip(ρi,t(θ), 1 −ϵ−, 1 + ϵ+) ˆAi
o
.
(26)
The sequence-level Active RL objective is
JRL(θ) = E x∼Dact(θold)
y1:K∼πθold(·|x)
"
1
K
K
X
i=1
1
|yi|
|yi|
X
t=1
ℓi,t(θ)
−βDKL (πθ∥πref)
#
.
(27)
Here, πref is the frozen checkpoint obtained after verified self-
distillation, β controls the KL regularization strength, and ϵ−
and ϵ+ denote the asymmetric clipping bounds. The same
rollout-level advantage ˆAi updates the token probabilities of
both ri and ai. Driving feedback thus optimizes the grounded
reasoning together with the action generated from it, retaining
the complete sequence as the learning unit.
After each optimization window, the updated checkpoint is
evaluated under greedy decoding and used to reconstruct the
active set for the next loop. As the policy improves, scenarios
that become reliably solvable are removed from the active set,
while scenarios that remain recoverable but unstable determine
the subsequent optimization distribution. The iterative process
is summarized as
πθ(k) →D(k)
act →πθ(k+1).
(28)
This alternation forms the Active RL Loop: trajectory rewards
refine complete reasoning-to-action sequences, and renewed
sampling identifies the next scenes on which to train. Across
the learning stages, the model progresses from understanding
individual grounded concepts to using them in action generation
and refining that generation through driving outcomes.
IV. DATA AND EVALUATION PROTOCOLS
A. NAVSIM and GR-NavSim
NAVSIM provides real-world driving scenes and a held-out
planning benchmark [51]. We construct GR-NavSim from its
training scenes using the GRA-centered pipeline, obtaining
107K annotated scenes and 2.2M grounded question-answer
pairs, together with Executable Planner examples and grounded
trajectory traces. Cognition and planning targets share the same
graph-derived object identities, physical states, interactions, and
decisions. Table II summarizes the corpus, and Fig. 5 compares
its scale with public driving QA datasets. Planning is evaluated


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
10
0
0.5M
1.0M
1.5M
2.0M
QA pairs (millions)
104
105
Scenes / keyframes (log)
OmniDrive
nuScenes-QA
LingoQA
DriveLM-nuScenes
BDD-X
DriveBench
DRAMA
MAPLM-QA
NuInstruct
Talk2Car
CODA-LM
DrivingVQA
GR-NavSim
Real, open-ended
Real, templated/short/MC
GR-NAVSIM (ours)
Fig. 5. Scale comparison of GR-NavSim and representative public driving
QA datasets by QA count and source scenes or keyframes. The vertical axis
is logarithmic; marker shapes distinguish answer formats.
on NAVSIM navtest under the official full protocol using the
PDM Score (PDMS) and one greedy autoregressive completion
per scene.
B. Internal Long-Tail Benchmark
Existing public driving benchmarks offer limited coverage
of complex long-tail interactions. Models can achieve high
scores primarily by fitting expert trajectories, making it
difficult to fully assess the benefits of complex reasoning and
reinforcement-driven exploration.
To evaluate these capabilities, we construct an internal long-
tail benchmark covering route obstructions, lane borrowing,
and road hazards. These scenarios require the ego vehicle
to determine when to pass, when to wait, and how to plan
a safe, feasible trajectory through the scene, accounting for
obstacle states, available space, and interaction constraints. The
benchmark contains 50K clips and 700K frames.
Each annotated key object is represented as oj = (tj, Ωj, pj),
where tj is its semantic type, Ωj its manually annotated BEV
region, and pj ∈{passable, non-passable} its passability. This
representation covers physical obstacles, construction regions,
and road-surface hazards.
a) Closed-loop Driving Score: The logged future trajec-
tory is not necessarily the only valid solution for a scene, as
it may reflect conservative waiting behavior or characteristics
of the original data-collection policy. We therefore roll out
each predicted trajectory and evaluate its safety, Key-Object
Compliance (KOC), route progress, and comfort. Safety is
a hard gate, Safety = Gcol(τ)Gnds(τ): the Collision Gate
equals one for rollouts without at-fault collisions, and the Non-
Drivable-Space Gate equals one when the ego footprint remains
within drivable space. The aggregate score is
CDS = Safety (0.45 KOC + 0.35 Progress + 0.20 Comfort) .
(29)
Progress is the maximum route displacement of the ego
front edge, normalized by the maximum reachable distance
TABLE II
COMPOSITION OF THE GR-NAVSIM TRAINING CORPUS.
Corpus component
Count
Role
Driving scenes with grounded
state labels
107K
Grounded objects, physical
states, interactions, and decisions
Grounded question-answer
pairs
2.2M
Grounded scene understanding
and interaction reasoning
Front-camera Executable
Planner examples
415K
Planner warm-up and
self-distillation
Grounded trajectory traces
70K
GRA paths paired with planner
actions
and clipped to [0, 1]; Comfort measures dynamic feasibility
and smoothness. The larger KOC weight emphasizes correct
responses to interaction-critical objects.
b) Key-Object Compliance: A pass-or-hold annotation
specifies the desired interaction decision but does not by itself
determine whether a generated trajectory actually executes
that decision. KOC therefore converts each annotated key-
object label into a geometric constraint on the simulated
trajectory. This formulation allows multiple geometrically
different trajectories to satisfy the same interaction constraint
rather than requiring agreement with a single logged future
trajectory.
We project each key-object region onto the route as Ij =
[s−
j , s+
j ]. Only objects intersecting the route interaction corridor
within the evaluation horizon are retained; unreachable pass-
required objects are excluded. The applicable pass and hold
constraints are
cpass
j
= I

smax
ego,front > s−
j + dtrigger

,
U = max
 s−
j0 −dfollow, Umin

,
chold = I

smax
ego,front ≤U

,
(30)
where smax
ego,front is the maximum route progress of the ego front
edge and j0 is the nearest hold-required object. The margins
dtrigger, dfollow, and Umin are fixed across models. Only pass-
required objects before the nearest hold boundary contribute,
allowing a trajectory to pass an earlier object and stop behind
a later one. For the applicable constraint set K,
KOC =
1
|K|
X
c∈K
c.
(31)
Progress is set to zero if the ego vehicle crosses a hold boundary.
Samples without applicable key-object constraints are excluded
from KOC aggregation, and all models use the same relevance
thresholds and invalid-sample filtering rules.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the central premise of GRA: physical evidence
should remain connected to interaction reasoning and exe-
cutable behavior. The experiments examine overall driving
performance, the contributions of the representation and staged
learning, and how grounded cognition supports the generated
actions.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
11
TABLE III
SINGLE-SAMPLE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON NAVSIM NAVTEST V1, GROUPED BY MODEL DESIGN.
Method
Backbone
Views
NC DAC
EP TTC Comf PDMS ↑
Non-VLA methods
UniAD [25]
—
Cam
97.8
91.9 78.8
92.9
100.0
83.4
PARA-Drive [65]
—
Cam
97.9
92.4 79.3
93.0
99.8
84.0
TransFuser [66]
—
C+L
97.7
92.8 79.2
92.8
100.0
84.0
DiffusionDrive [28]
—
C+L
98.2
96.2 82.2
94.7
100.0
88.1
VLAs with additional trajectory head or world model
DriveVLA-W0 [31]
Emu-3-8B
Cam
98.7
99.1 87.6
97.1
100.0
90.2
ExploreVLA [67]
—
Cam
98.8
98.4 83.5
96.5
99.9
90.4
ReCogDrive [17]
InternVL2-8B
Cam
98.2
97.8 83.5
95.2
100.0
89.6
VLAs with direct action generation
AutoVLA one-shot [3]
Qwen2.5-VL-3B
Cam
96.9
92.4 75.8
88.1
99.9
80.5
AutoVLA Post-RFT [3]
Qwen2.5-VL-3B
Cam
98.4
95.6 81.9
98.0
99.9
89.1
Curious-VLA [38]
Qwen2.5-VL-3B
Cam
98.4
96.9 88.5
97.9
98.1
90.3
AdaThinkDrive [68]
InternVL3-8B
Cam
98.4
97.8 84.4
95.2
100.0
90.3
GRAVA before Active RL
Qwen3-VL-8B
Cam
96.1
91.2 78.8
91.0
99.7
82.1
GRAVA after Active RL
Qwen3-VL-8B
Cam
98.8
97.6 83.5
97.1
100.0
90.5
GRAVA is evaluated before and after Active RL under the same inference protocol. Cam and C+L denote camera-only and camera-plus-LiDAR inputs. NC:
no-at-fault collision; DAC: drivable-area compliance; EP: ego progress; TTC: time to collision; Comf: comfort; PDMS: PDM Score. Higher is better for all
metrics.
TABLE IV
COMPONENT ABLATION ON NAVSIM NAVTEST UNDER THE FULL SINGLE-SAMPLE EVALUATION PROTOCOL.
Pre-training Reasoning condition Action representation SD Active RL
NC DAC
EP TTC Comf PDMS ↑
None
Full GRA
Executable Planner
✓
✓
95.3
90.0 75.4
90.9
99.8
79.80
GRA
Full GRA
Direct waypoints
✓
✓
97.7
95.0 82.4
94.2
99.9
87.23
GRA
Full GRA
Executable Planner
—
—
96.0
91.3 77.3
91.7
99.9
81.74
GRA
Full GRA
Executable Planner
✓
—
96.1
91.2 78.8
91.0
99.7
82.10
GRA
Full GRA
Executable Planner
✓
✓
98.8
97.6 83.5
97.1 100.0
90.48
Each scene uses one greedy completion. SD denotes verified self-distillation. Metric abbreviations follow Table III; higher is better for all metrics.
TABLE V
ABLATION OF PRE-TRAINING, REASONING STRUCTURE, AND ACTIVE RL ON THE INTERNAL LONG-TAIL BENCHMARK.
Pre-training
Reasoning condition
Active RL
Col.
NDS
KOC
Progress
Comfort
CDS ↑
None
Full GRA
✓
95.8
94.7
81.7
89.6
98.8
79.7
Ungrounded
Full GRA
✓
96.3
95.4
84.2
90.7
99.1
82.2
GRA
Action only
✓
94.6
93.2
77.4
86.9
97.9
74.8
GRA
Coarse reasoning
✓
95.2
94.1
80.6
88.4
98.6
77.9
GRA
Grounded objects only
✓
97.1
96.4
87.9
91.3
99.3
85.5
GRA
Full GRA
—
93.1
94.9
69.8
90.1
98.9
73.1
GRA
Full GRA
✓
98.2
97.6
92.3
92.9
99.6
90.1
All variants use the Executable Planner and verified self-distillation. Col. and NDS denote the pass rates of the Collision Gate and Non-Drivable-Space Gate.
KOC: Key-Object Compliance; CDS: Closed-loop Driving Score. Higher is better for all metrics.
A. Setup
GRAVA uses Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [4] as its backbone
and follows the GRA-aligned training procedure in Sec. III-D.
Only about 60% of the available human driving demonstrations
are used for action supervision. Unless otherwise specified, all
main results use a single greedy autoregressive completion
per scene; multiple samples are used for self-distillation,
diagnostic analyses, and Active RL. The generated Executable
Planner action is converted to a trajectory by the fixed decoder.
Benchmark definitions and evaluation protocols follow Sec. IV.
B. Main NAVSIM Results
We first assess the overall driving performance of the GRA
framework. With a single camera and one greedy completion
per scene, GRAVA achieves 90.48 PDMS on NAVSIM navtest.
It obtains the highest PDMS among the directly autoregressive
VLAs in Table III and remains competitive with systems that
introduce an additional trajectory head or world model. The
table groups methods by model design to place this result
in context, with differences in backbone, sensor inputs, and
training data.
This performance is achieved by generating grounded
reasoning and executable actions within one autoregressive
policy, with no learned trajectory head or world model. Active
RL further improves this policy using the driving outcomes of
its generated sequences, while the visual input, greedy decoding
procedure, and fixed trajectory decoder remain unchanged. We
next examine how the representation and its training stages
contribute to this performance.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
12
High-reward reasoning
Low-reward reasoning
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
0.823
0.438
55%
3%
+38.5 pp
Counterfactual reasoning intervention
PDMS
Win rate
Fig. 6. Effect of reasoning intervention on action generation. Normalized
PDMS and win rate are compared under high- and low-reward GRA reasoning,
with the scene input and deterministic trajectory decoder held fixed.
C. Component Ablation on NAVSIM
Table IV relates the overall performance to two aspects
of the framework: learning grounded cognition and its action
interface, and refining the resulting policy through post-training.
All variants follow the same NAVSIM evaluation protocol.
GRA pre-training provides an important foundation for
planning. Removing it reduces PDMS by 10.68 points, from
90.48 to 79.80. Figure 4(a) also shows lower loss at the start
of planning training with GRA pre-training than when training
the planner from a cold start. These observations support
the role of grounded cognition before learning to use it for
action generation. Replacing the Executable Planner with direct
waypoint generation reduces PDMS by 3.25 points, indicating
that the primitive-specific action representation helps translate
the learned reasoning into vehicle motion.
Verified self-distillation provides a further 0.36-point im-
provement before RL. The resulting policy can already generate
high-reward behaviors in some scenes, but does not yet produce
them reliably. Active RL improves this policy from 82.10
to 90.48 PDMS by optimizing complete reasoning-to-action
sequences using driving outcomes. Figure 4(b) shows gains
across successive active loops, while continued training beyond
an on-policy window without refreshing the active set leads to
declining performance. This behavior supports refreshing the
recoverable scenarios as the policy changes, as described in
Sec. III-D. The internal benchmark further examines how this
learning process affects decisions in complex interactions.
D. Internal Long-Tail Results
The internal benchmark evaluates decision-making and the
ability to navigate complex long-tail scenes involving route
obstructions, lane borrowing, and road hazards. The ego vehicle
must decide when to proceed or wait and plan a safe, feasible
trajectory that carries out that decision. Following Sec. IV-B,
Key-Object Compliance (KOC) measures the execution of
TABLE VI
GROUNDED QUESTION-ANSWERING PERFORMANCE ON THE HELD-OUT
GR-NAVSIM EVALUATION SET.
Subtype
Qwen3-
VL-8B
Kimi-
K2.5
GPT-5.4
GRAVA
Scene
Summary
6.09
6.03
7.08
7.47
Traffic sign
4.74
5.58
5.87
7.63
Navigation
6.21
6.44
6.33
6.67
Congestion
5.41
6.79
6.59
7.92
Average
5.61
6.21
6.47
7.42
Object perception
Critical object description
2.01
2.19
2.79
5.71
Critical object identification
1.32
2.80
3.71
5.69
Average
1.65
2.51
3.27
5.70
Object interaction
Intention
4.69
5.04
6.37
6.13
Navigation interaction
4.20
4.60
6.17
6.49
Object interaction
4.00
3.31
5.06
5.23
Map interaction
4.68
4.65
5.62
6.73
Ego interaction
4.27
4.03
4.94
6.00
Average
4.37
4.32
5.63
6.12
Decision (label accuracy)
Object decision
3.16
3.68
4.21
8.34
Ego decision
6.05
6.32
5.13
8.66
Overall
4.40
4.77
5.39
6.86
Scene, object-perception, and object-interaction subtypes use 0–10 scores;
decision subtypes use label accuracy. Average and Overall denote category
and aggregate scores, respectively. Qwen3-VL-8B is the untuned backbone.
Bold indicates the best result; higher is better.
interaction decisions, while CDS evaluates overall driving per-
formance. We vary the pre-training target, reasoning structure,
and use of Active RL while keeping inference fixed, with
results reported in Table V.
Grounded pre-training provides stronger benefits than un-
grounded cognition supervision. Ungrounded pre-training im-
proves CDS by 2.5 points over no pre-training, while GRA
pre-training further improves CDS by 7.9 points and KOC by
8.1 points. This comparison extends the NAVSIM ablation by
showing the value of grounding the cognition learned before
planning, particularly for responding to interaction-critical
objects.
The reasoning structure provides benefits beyond object
grounding alone. Full GRA improves KOC and CDS by 14.9
and 15.3 points over action-only prediction, and by 4.4 and
4.6 points over the grounded-objects-only variant. The latter
comparison directly addresses the role of the interaction and
decision paths in Sec. III-B: identifying an object supplies the
evidence, while reasoning about its effect on the ego route
supports decisions about whether and how to proceed. The
gains in both metrics indicate better execution of these decisions
and improved driving performance through the scene.
Active RL further improves the policy’s ability to carry out
these decisions in complex long-tail scenes. KOC increases
from 69.8 to 92.3 and CDS from 73.1 to 90.1, whereas Progress
and Comfort improve by 2.8 and 0.7 points. These gains
reflect better execution of appropriate pass-or-hold behavior
and improved overall driving performance. The larger increase
in KOC indicates that the benefit mainly lies in carrying out


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
13
0-3
3-4
4-5
5-6
6-7
7-9
9-15
Numerical grounding density
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
PDMS
0.804
0.819
0.840
0.863
0.876
0.892
0.899
(a) PDMS vs grounding density
Densest
grounding
Sparsest
grounding
0.00
0.08
0.16
0.80
0.84
0.88
Score
0.862
0.818
7.8%
12.7%
(b) Within-case paired comparison
PDMS
Zero rate
Fig. 7. Numerical grounding density and planning quality. Density counts references to action-relevant object distances and speeds. (a) Mean normalized
PDMS across density bins. (b) Within-scene comparison of the densest and sparsest completions in normalized PDMS and zero-PDMS rate.
NAVSIM
Grounded reasoning in public driving scenes
(a) Queue and crossing rider
CRAWL
#1 route blocker  ·  #2 crossing rider
GROUNDING
#1 is stopped 15.7 m ahead in the ego lane.
#2 crosses at 11.1 m.
INTERACTION
#1 blocks forward progress; #2 adds a
crossing conflict.
DECISION
Keep the current lane and decelerate to a
controlled crawl.
ACTION CRAWL · D 8 waypoints · x = −0.40 m · y: 1.80 → 8.00 m
(b) Open-door roadside hazard
CURVE
#1 right-side open-door hazard
GROUNDING
#1 is parked on the right shoulder 10 m
away, with its door open and a person
nearby.
INTERACTION
The open door creates a lateral hazard that
requires clearance.
DECISION
Maintain the lane with slight deceleration
while passing.
ACTION CURVE · D P1(−0.25,6.15) · P2(−0.85,11.85) · P3(3.25,18.05)
INTERNAL
Grounded reasoning in long-tail scenes
(c) Signal and lead-vehicle hold
STOP
GROUNDING
The signal is red. #1 is stopped 8.0 m ahead
in the same lane.
INTERACTION
#1 blocks the forward path, and the red
signal requires a halt.
DECISION
Stay in the current lane and hold a safe
stationary position.
ACTION STOP · D endpoint (0.00, 0.00) m
(d) Construction-side clearance
CRUISE
GROUNDING
#1 travels 19.6 m ahead; a stopped bus and
construction occupy the right side.
INTERACTION
Follow #1 while maintaining lateral
clearance from the roadside hazards.
DECISION
Go slightly left within the lane while
decelerating.
ACTION CRUISE · D progress 18.30 m · lateral −0.04 m · v_final 4.50 m/s
#1 pickup · 15.7 m
#2 rider · 11.1 m
#1 open-door car · 10 m
#1 stopped lead · 8.0 m
#1 lead sedan · 19.6 m
Fig. 8. Qualitative GRA examples on NAVSIM (top) and the internal long-tail benchmark (bottom). Each example links grounded scene evidence to interaction
reasoning, driving decisions, and an Executable Planner action.
the appropriate maneuver, rather than simply advancing farther
through the scene.
E. Grounded Reasoning Analysis
The long-tail results motivate a closer examination of how
GRA reasoning uses physical evidence and influences the action
generated from it. We also evaluate the grounded cognition
capabilities that support this process.
a) Effect of Reasoning on Action Generation: GRA learns
action generation as a continuation of grounded reasoning
(Sec. III-A). To examine whether this preceding reasoning
affects behavior, we hold the scene input and deterministic
trajectory decoder fixed and replace only the reasoning se-
quence. As shown in Fig. 6, replacing low-reward reasoning
with its high-reward counterpart changes the predicted action
and increases normalized PDMS from 0.438 to 0.823, while the
win rate rises from 3% to 55%. This intervention provides direct
evidence that the generated action depends on the reasoning
in its context, supporting the reasoning-to-action connection
proposed to address G2.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
14
b) Numerical Grounding: Having established that rea-
soning affects action generation, we examine the physical
information used within it. Numerical grounding density counts
references to the distances and speeds of action-relevant objects,
corresponding to the physical-state evidence introduced to
address G1. Figure 7(a) shows that normalized PDMS increases
from 0.804 in the lowest-density bin to 0.899 in the highest.
The within-scene comparison in Fig. 7(b) follows the same
trend: the densest completion averages 0.862 normalized PDMS
with a 7.8% zero-score rate, compared with 0.818 and 12.7%
for the sparsest. Both comparisons associate explicit physical-
state grounding with better planning outcomes. The measured
content concerns object distances and speeds, rather than the
overall length of the reasoning trace.
c) Grounded Question-Answering Performance: The pre-
ceding analyses examine reasoning during planning; the held-
out GR-NavSim QA set evaluates the individual cognition
capabilities underlying that reasoning. This follows the shared-
supervision design in Sec. III-B, where questions teach
grounded concepts that reappear in the complete reasoning-to-
action sequence. We compare GRAVA with GPT-5.4 [69], Kimi-
K2.5 [70], and the untuned Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct backbone.
Open-ended responses are scored by an independent LLM
judge, while decision questions are evaluated using label
accuracy. All models receive the same ego-frame coordinate
prompt for localization.
GRAVA achieves the highest overall score of 6.86 and leads
on 12 of the 13 subtypes (Table VI); GPT-5.4 performs slightly
better only on intention prediction. The strongest gains over the
untuned backbone concern critical-object perception and object-
level decisions. For example, the critical-object identification
score rises from 1.32 to 5.69, while the object-decision
score rises from 3.16 to 8.34. These improvements concern
recognizing the relevant physical evidence and determining the
response required by each object. Together with the planning
ablations, they support learning these grounded concepts
through shared supervision and using them in subsequent action
generation.
F. Executable Planner Analysis
Grounded cognition must ultimately be expressed as vehicle
motion. The Executable Planner ablation establishes the benefit
of this action interface; we now examine how its parameters
account for differences in trajectory quality. Among low-score
cases with a large reward gap between sampled actions, high-
and low-reward trajectories use the same motion primitive in
most cases. Their differences lie in endpoints, lateral offsets,
speed profiles, and CRAWL waypoints. Selecting the motion
regime therefore leaves an important part of the driving decision
to be resolved through its continuous parameters.
Within the same motion primitive, driving rewards dis-
tinguish parameter choices that lead to different trajectory
quality. The primitive-specific action space in Sec. III-C
therefore allows Active RL to refine how a behavior is executed
through its endpoints, lateral offsets, or speed parameters.
This complements the improved compliance with interaction
constraints observed on the internal benchmark.
G. Qualitative Grounded Reasoning-to-Action Analysis
Figure 8 brings these analyses together through complete
GRA examples. In the NAVSIM queue scene, grounding
identifies a stopped vehicle in the ego lane and a crossing
rider. The interaction reasoning assigns different constraints
to these objects: the vehicle blocks forward progress, while
the rider introduces a crossing conflict. Their combined effect
supports keeping the lane and decelerating to a controlled crawl,
which is expressed by the CRAWL action. The same object
evidence is thus preserved from reference resolution through
interaction reasoning to executable behavior.
The remaining cases illustrate different consequences of
this structure. An open-door roadside hazard requires lateral
clearance and produces a CURVE trajectory. On the internal
benchmark, a red signal and stopped lead vehicle require a
STOP action, whereas a moving lead vehicle and roadside
construction call for following with lateral clearance, expressed
through CRUISE parameters. Across these cases, GRA connects
what the model observes to why a response is needed and how
it is executed.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented GRAVA, a Grounded Reasoning-to-Action
framework that connects physical scene evidence, structured
reasoning, and executable behavior through a shared GRA rep-
resentation. GRA binds action-relevant linguistic references to
visual regions and physical states, while organizing interactions,
decisions, and planning anchors in a trajectory-anchored graph.
The same representation supports both cognition and planning
supervision, while GRA-aligned pre-training, the Executable
Planner, verified self-distillation, and Active RL progressively
transform grounded reasoning into executable actions. The
resulting GRA-centered data pipeline further produces GR-
NavSim with 107K grounded scenes and 2.2M grounded
question-answer pairs. GRAVA-8B achieves 90.48 PDMS on
NAVSIM, while full GRA improves Key-Object Compliance
and Closed-loop Driving Score by 19.3% and 20.5% relative to
action-only prediction, respectively. These results demonstrate
the benefit of constructing grounding, reasoning, and action
learning around a shared action-relevant representation.
Future work will extend GRAVA toward temporal and
multi-view grounding, interactive closed-loop environments,
longer-horizon behaviors, and more efficient reasoning through
distillation and adaptive computation.
REFERENCES
[1] J.-J. Hwang et al., “Emma: End-to-end multimodal model for autonomous
driving,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2025.
[2] X. Zhou, X. Han, F. Yang, Y. Ma, V. Tresp, and A. Knoll, “Opendrivevla:
Towards end-to-end autonomous driving with large vision language action
model,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 40, no. 16, 2026, pp. 13 782–13 790.
[3] Z. Zhou et al., “Autovla: A vision-language-action model for end-to-end
autonomous driving with adaptive reasoning and reinforcement fine-
tuning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 38,
2025.
[4] S.
Bai
et
al.,
“Qwen3-vl
technical
report,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.
[5] R. Krishna et al., “Visual genome: Connecting language and vision
using crowdsourced dense image annotations,” International Journal of
Computer Vision, vol. 123, pp. 32–73, 2017.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
15
[6] D. A. Hudson and C. D. Manning, “Gqa: A new dataset for real-world
visual reasoning and compositional question answering,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2019, pp. 6700–6709.
[7] A. Kamath, M. Singh, Y. LeCun, G. Synnaeve, I. Misra, and N. Carion,
“MDETR: Modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2021, pp. 1780–1790.
[8] S. Liu et al., “Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with grounded pre-
training for open-set object detection,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2024,
2024, pp. 38–55.
[9] Z. Peng et al., “Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models
to the world,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
[10] H. You et al., “Ferret: Refer and ground anything anywhere at any
granularity,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
[11] B. Chen et al., “SpatialVLM: Endowing vision-language models with
spatial reasoning capabilities,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp.
14 455–14 465.
[12] C. Sima et al., “DriveLM: Driving with graph visual question answering,”
in Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, 2024, pp. 256–274.
[13] X. Tian et al., “DriveVLM: The convergence of autonomous driving and
large vision-language models,” in Proceedings of The 8th Conference on
Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol.
270.
PMLR, 2025, pp. 4698–4726.
[14] H. Shao et al., “LMDrive: Closed-loop end-to-end driving with large
language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 15 120–
15 130.
[15] B. Jiang et al., “Senna: Bridging large vision-language models and end-
to-end autonomous driving,” International Journal of Computer Vision,
vol. 134, no. 9, 2026.
[16] NVIDIA et al., “Alpamayo-R1: Bridging reasoning and action prediction
for generalizable autonomous driving in the long tail,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.00088, 2025.
[17] Y. Li et al., “ReCogDrive: A reinforced cognitive framework for end-
to-end autonomous driving,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[18] W. Zheng et al., “DriveAgent-R1: Advancing vlm-based autonomous
driving with active perception and hybrid thinking,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[19] F. Codevilla, M. Muller, A. Lopez, V. Koltun, and A. Dosovitskiy,
“End-to-end driving via conditional imitation learning,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018, pp.
4693–4700.
[20] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Krahenbuhl, “Learning by cheating,”
in Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 100.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 66–75.
[21] P. Wu, X. Jia, L. Chen, J. Yan, H. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Trajectory-guided
control prediction for end-to-end autonomous driving: A simple yet
strong baseline,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 35, 2022.
[22] H. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Zhong, B. Wang, C. Sun, and F. Sun, “Delving
into the secrets of BEV 3d object detection in autonomous driving: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 119–144, 2026.
[23] S. Hu, L. Chen, P. Wu, H. Li, J. Yan, and D. Tao, “ST-P3: End-to-end
vision-based autonomous driving via spatial-temporal feature learning,”
in Computer Vision – ECCV 2022, 2022, pp. 533–549.
[24] K. Renz, K. Chitta, O.-B. Mercea, A. S. Koepke, Z. Akata, and
A. Geiger, “PlanT: Explainable planning transformers via object-level
representations,” in Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot
Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 205.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 459–470.
[25] Y. Hu et al., “Planning-oriented autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2023, pp. 17 853–17 862.
[26] B. Jiang et al., “VAD: Vectorized scene representation for efficient
autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023, pp. 8340–8350.
[27] W. Sun, X. Lin, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, H. Wu, and S. Zheng, “SparseDrive:
End-to-end autonomous driving via sparse scene representation,” in 2025
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2025, pp. 8795–8801.
[28] B. Liao et al., “DiffusionDrive: Truncated diffusion model for end-to-end
autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025, pp. 12 037–
12 047.
[29] D. Zhang et al., “CarPlanner: Consistent auto-regressive trajectory
planning for large-scale reinforcement learning in autonomous driving,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025, pp. 17 239–17 248.
[30] R. Feng et al., “ARTEMIS: Autoregressive end-to-end trajectory planning
with mixture of experts for autonomous driving,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 226–233, 2026.
[31] Y. Li et al., “DriveVLA-W0: World models amplify data scaling
law in autonomous driving,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[32] X. Zhou et al., “Qwen-Drive-1.0: An initial step towards a vision-
language foundation model for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2609.00111, 2026.
[33] J. Philion, X. B. Peng, and S. Fidler, “Trajeglish: Traffic modeling
as next-token prediction,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[34] Z. Yang, L. Chen, Y. Sun, and H. Li, “Visual point cloud forecasting
enables scalable autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024,
pp. 14 673–14 684.
[35] Y. Bai et al., “Is a 3D-tokenized LLM the key to reliable autonomous
driving?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18361, 2024.
[36] X. Huang et al., “DriveGPT: Scaling autoregressive behavior models
for driving,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol.
267.
PMLR, 2025, pp. 25 908–25 921.
[37] K. Pertsch et al., “FAST: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-
action models,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2025.
[38] C. Chen et al., “Devil is in narrow policy: Unleashing exploration in
driving VLA models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06049, 2026.
[39] K. Renz, L. Chen, E. Arani, and O. Sinavski, “SimLingo: Vision-only
closed-loop autonomous driving with language-action alignment,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025, pp. 11 993–12 003.
[40] X. Wang et al., “Unifying language-action understanding and generation
for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2026, pp. 25 193–
25 203.
[41] X. Gao et al., “Neuro-symbolic drive: Rule-grounded faithful reasoning
for driving VLAs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.23938, 2026.
[42] F. Yu et al., “BDD100K: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous
multitask learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 2636–2645.
[43] H. Caesar et al., “nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous
driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 11 621–11 631.
[44] P. Sun et al., “Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo
open dataset,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 2446–2454.
[45] H. Caesar et al., “nuPlan: A closed-loop ML-based planning benchmark
for autonomous vehicles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810, 2021.
[46] T. Deruyttere, S. Vandenhende, D. Grujicic, L. Van Gool, and M.-
F. Moens, “Talk2Car: Taking control of your self-driving car,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019, pp. 2088–2098.
[47] T. Qian, J. Chen, L. Zhuo, Y. Jiao, and Y.-G. Jiang, “NuScenes-QA:
A multi-modal visual question answering benchmark for autonomous
driving scenario,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 5, 2024, pp. 4542–4550.
[48] A.-M. Marcu et al., “LingoQA: Visual question answering for au-
tonomous driving,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, 2024, pp. 252–269.
[49] S.-Y. Park et al., “NuPlanQA: A large-scale dataset and benchmark for
multi-view driving scene understanding in multi-modal large language
models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 2025, pp. 8066–8076.
[50] J.-T. Zhai et al., “Rethinking the open-loop evaluation of end-to-end
autonomous driving in nuScenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10430,
2023.
[51] D. Dauner et al., “NAVSIM: Data-driven non-reactive autonomous
vehicle simulation and benchmarking,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 37, 2024, pp. 28 706–28 719.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, 2026
16
[52] X. Jia, Z. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, and J. Yan, “Bench2Drive: Towards
multi-ability benchmarking of closed-loop end-to-end autonomous driv-
ing,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
2024.
[53] W. Cao et al., “Pseudo-simulation for autonomous driving,” in Proceed-
ings of The 9th Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 305.
PMLR, 2025, pp. 4709–4722.
[54] S. Ross, G. J. Gordon, and J. A. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learn-
ing and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15.
PMLR, 2011, pp. 627–635.
[55] Q. Xie, M.-T. Luong, E. Hovy, and Q. V. Le, “Self-training with
noisy student improves ImageNet classification,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2020, pp. 10 687–10 698.
[56] E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, J. Mu, and N. D. Goodman, “STaR: Bootstrapping
reasoning with reasoning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35, 2022, pp. 15 476–15 488.
[57] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[58] R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and
C. Finn, “Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly
a reward model,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 36, 2023, pp. 53 728–53 741.
[59] T. Chu et al., “SFT memorizes, RL generalizes: A comparative study of
foundation model post-training,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 267.
PMLR, 2025, pp. 10 818–10 838.
[60] Z. Shao et al., “DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300,
2024.
[61] Q. Yu et al., “DAPO: An open-source LLM reinforcement learning
system at scale,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 38, 2025, pp. 125 532–125 554.
[62] G. Cui et al., “The entropy mechanism of reinforcement learning for
reasoning language models,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026.
[63] B. Jiang, S. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “AlphaDrive:
Unleashing the power of VLMs in autonomous driving via reinforcement
learning and reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07608, 2025.
[64] Z. Huang et al., “Gen-Drive: Enhancing diffusion generative driving
policies with reward modeling and reinforcement learning fine-tuning,”
in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2025, pp. 3445–3451.
[65] X. Weng, B. Ivanovic, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and M. Pavone, “PARA-
Drive: Parallelized architecture for real-time autonomous driving,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 15 449–15 458.
[66] K. Chitta, A. Prakash, B. Jaeger, Z. Yu, K. Renz, and A. Geiger,
“TransFuser: Imitation with transformer-based sensor fusion for au-
tonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 12 878–12 895, 2023.
[67] Z. Sheng, X. Ye, J. Luo, S. Chen, and L. Ren, “ExploreVLA: Dense
world modeling and exploration for end-to-end autonomous driving,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02714, 2026.
[68] Y. Luo et al., “AdaThinkDrive: Adaptive thinking via reinforcement
learning for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13769,
2025.
[69] OpenAI, “GPT-5.4 Thinking System Card,” March 2026, published
March
5,
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://openai.com/index/
gpt-5-4-thinking-system-card/
[70] Kimi Team et al., “Kimi K2.5: Visual agentic intelligence,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.02276, 2026.
Xiao Liu received the M.S. degree in vehicle
engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, China, in 2021. He is pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in intelligent vehicle technology at the Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. He was a
research intern at Baidu and Shineon AI, working on
large vision-language models for autonomous driving.
His research interests include vision-based perception,
end-to-end autonomous driving, and large language
models for complex driving scenarios.
Haoyu Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
at the National Engineering Research Center of
Electric Vehicles, Beijing Institute of Technology,
China. He is also a visiting Ph.D. student at the
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His
research interests include robust multi-sensor fusion
for perception and prediction in autonomous driving,
and embodied intelligence for physical-world agents.
Jianghao Leng received the B.S. degree in vehicle
engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China, in 2019, and the Ph.D. degree in
mechanical engineering from Beijing Institute of
Technology in 2025. From 2023 to 2024, he was
a visiting student at the College of Design and
Engineering, National University of Singapore. His
research interests include multi-sensor fusion SLAM,
motion planning and eco-driving for connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs).
Lin Wang (Member, IEEE) is currently an Assistant
Professor with the School of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Sin-
gapore, where he leads the Embodied Perception and
InterACTion (EmPACT) Lab. His research interests
include bio-inspired sensing and perception, event-
based vision, sensor fusion, neuromorphic multi-
modal AI, spatial intelligence, embodied robotic
systems, and edge AI.
Chao Sun (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Bei-
hang University, Beijing, China, and the Beijing Insti-
tute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010 and 2016,
respectively. He was a postdoctoral researcher with
the Energy, Controls, and Applications Laboratory,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. He
is currently an Associate Professor at the Beijing
Institute of Technology. His research interests include
automated and connected vehicles and hybrid electric
vehicles.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
17
APPENDIX A
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
All stages of the progressive GRA training procedure in
Sec. III-D fine-tune Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct with DeepSpeed
ZeRO-2. Each input contains the native 1920 × 1080 front-
camera image, ego state, motion history, and navigation com-
mand. Table S1 gives the training settings.
TABLE S1
TRAINING CONFIGURATION. BATCH SIZE IS PER GPU. GA DENOTES
GRADIENT ACCUMULATION.
Stage
Epochs
LR
Batch / GA Max length Compute
GRA pre-training
1
1×10−5
4 / 1
4,096
4×8 H20
Planner warm-up
3
1×10−5
4 / 1
4,096
2×8 H20
Self-distillation
1
5×10−6
4 / 1
4,096
2×8 H20
Active RL
—
1×10−6
4 / 1
4,096
1 rollout + 3 training
+ 1 sim node
NAVSIM data composition: Of the 107K grounded GR-
NavSim scenes reported in the main paper, 102,861 have valid
official evaluation caches and form the planner and Active RL
pool. Grounding-consistency filtering retains 62,111 of these
cases for planner warm-up.
A. Verified Self-Distillation
Starting from the planner warm-up policy, GRAVA samples
complete reasoning-to-action sequences yi = [ri; ai] and selects
candidates using the closed-loop rewards of their decoded trajec-
tories. As defined in Eq. (20), each retained target y+
i = [r+
i ; a+
i ]
keeps the reasoning and Executable Planner action from the same
reward-selected rollout. The distilled policy initializes Active
RL and serves as its frozen reference.
B. Executable Planner Decoding
Algorithm S1 defines the fixed decoder Dp(g, ϕ; sego) that
realizes each autoregressive Executable Planner action as an
eight-waypoint ego-frame trajectory. Each branch reads the
fields declared in Table I.
The decoder has no learned parameters. STOP expands an
endpoint into a smooth profile based on the current ego speed,
and CRAWL decodes eight position controls. CURVE evaluates
a cubic Bézier curve from the ego origin p0 = (0, 0),
B(t) =
3
X
j=0
3
j

(1 −t)3−jtjpj,
t ∈[0, 1],
(S1)
at t ∈{1/8, . . . , 1}. CRUISE uses a cubic Hermite profile for
monotone longitudinal progress and linear interpolation for the
terminal lateral offset. The current and terminal speeds condition
the longitudinal profile.
Why CRAWL emits explicit waypoints: CRAWL outputs
eight points for low-speed stop-and-go motion. Its coordinate
range is narrower than that of unrestricted waypoint regression,
so direct prediction remains tractable. The points retain small
longitudinal changes that a low-dimensional curve may smooth
out. The other primitives span wider motion ranges and use
compact geometric parameters.
Algorithm S1 Executable Planner decoding ˆτ = Dp(g, ϕ; sego).
Input : structured action
{planner: p, gear: g, params: phi},
ego state s_ego
Output: eight-waypoint trajectory
tau_hat = (x_1..8, y_1..8)
1: parse p, g, phi <- action
2: assert phi in Phi_p
# validate schema
3: p0 <- (0, 0)
# ego origin
4: switch p do
5: case STOP:
6:
q <- stop_profile(||phi.endpoint||,
7:
speed(s_ego), 8)
8:
tau_hat <- q * phi.endpoint
9: case CRAWL:
10:
tau_hat <- decode_points(g, phi.points)
11: case CURVE:
12:
B(t) <- Bezier(
13:
p0, decode_controls(g, phi))
14:
tau_hat <- {B(k / 8)} for k = 1..8
15: case CRUISE:
16:
y <- monotone_Hermite(
17:
phi.progress_end, speed(s_ego),
18:
phi.v_end, 8)
19:
x <- {k * phi.lat_end / 8} for k = 1..8
20:
tau_hat <- {(x_k, y_k)} for k = 1..8
21: return tau_hat
# ego frame
C. Active RL Configuration
Active RL scores each complete GRA reasoning-to-action
sequence with the PDMS of its decoded trajectory. We sample
K = 8 completions at temperature 0.8 and top-p = 0.95,
set the KL coefficient to β = 0.01, and use DAPO-style
asymmetric clipping at (0.20, 0.28). Rewards are normalized
within each group; overlong completions are filtered, with up to
three resampling attempts.
Recoverable scenario selection: We screen every training
case with one greedy completion, yielding a mean normalized
PDMS of 0.9101. Cases below 0.9 receive eight sampled rollouts.
We retain cases that satisfy all three reward-variation criteria:
min si < 0.8,
max si ≥0.9,
std(si) ≥0.10
(S2)
Table S2 reports the number of cases after each filter.
TABLE S2
SELECTION OF RECOVERABLE SCENARIOS FOR THE ACTIVE RL UPDATE
SET.
Selection step
Cases
Meaning
Current checkpoint
evaluation
102,861
One greedy completion per
case
Greedy below 0.9
26,151
Cases with potential for
improvement
Best-of-8 reaches at least
0.9
14,398
Recoverable under
best-of-8 sampling
All reward-variation criteria
4,676
Cases used for the RL
update
Low greedy reward alone does not define the training set.
We also require low- and high-reward sampled outcomes and
sufficient variance. Consecutive active sets of 4,676 and 6,464
cases share only 1,995 cases, a Jaccard overlap of 21.8%,
motivating rescreening after every outer loop.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
18
APPENDIX B
VISUALIZATION OF GRA PLANNING
(a) Signal-controlled stop
STOP
PDMS 1.00
THINK The ego vehicle approaches a signalized intersection with a
straight navigation command. The traffic light ahead is red, causing
vehicles to queue in all lanes. The ego vehicle is in the center lane
behind a black pickup truck [#1] that is stationary at 9.7 m distance with
brake lights illuminated. This lead vehicle directly blocks the forward path
and controls the ego's motion. Adjacent lanes also contain queued
vehicles, confirming normal signal-controlled stopping behavior rather
than an incident. The ego vehicle maintains its lane position and
decelerates to a stop behind [#1], waiting for the signal to change before
proceeding straight through the intersection.
PLANNING STOP · D — endpoint (0.00, 0.50) m
(b) Queue and crossing rider
CRAWL
PDMS 1.00
THINK The ego vehicle approaches a signalized intersection on a
straight navigation route, with traffic queueing ahead. The lead vehicle
[#1], a black pickup truck at [0.3, 15.7] and 15.7 m ahead, is stationary at
0.0 m/s directly in the ego lane on the navigation path. This stopped lead
vehicle controls the ego's forward progress, requiring the ego to follow
and maintain safe spacing. A motorcyclist [#2] is crossing the
intersection from right to left at 11.1 m distance with 1.7 m/s speed,
creating a secondary caution situation that reinforces the need for a
controlled low-speed approach. The ego vehicle keeps its current lane
and decelerates to a crawl, matching the queue's stationary state while
monitoring for the crossing motorcyclist to clear before proceeding.
PLANNING CRAWL · D — waypoints (m):
(-0.40, 1.80) · (-0.40, 3.40) · (-0.40, 4.80) · (-0.40, 5.90)
(-0.40, 6.80) · (-0.40, 7.40) · (-0.40, 7.80) · (-0.40, 8.00)
(c) Queue resumption
CRUISE
PDMS 1.00
THINK The ego vehicle is stopped at a green traffic light on a straight
urban road, positioned in the center lane with navigation set to proceed
straight through the upcoming intersection. The traffic signal is green and
the queue ahead is beginning to move. Vehicle [#1], a black SUV, is the
immediate lead vehicle directly ahead in the same lane at approximately
11.6 meters distance, moving slowly at 1.1 m/s as the traffic flow
resumes. This lead vehicle controls the ego vehicle's forward progress,
requiring the ego to follow and maintain safe spacing as the queue
accelerates from standstill. The ego vehicle keeps its current lane
position and accelerates gradually to follow the moving traffic ahead,
matching the low-speed resumption of the queue while preserving safe
following distance to [#1].
PLANNING CRUISE · D — progress 8.35 m · lateral −0.03 m · final
speed 4.25 m/s
(d) Open-door roadside hazard
CURVE
PDMS 1.00
THINK The ego vehicle proceeds straight along a curved urban road
with a stop sign visible on the left side ahead. The navigation route
continues straight through the curve. Vehicle [#1] is a stationary white
car parked on the right shoulder at [5.1, 8.5], 10 meters away, with its
driver-side door open and a person standing nearby engaged in loading
or unloading. This creates a lateral hazard requiring caution, though the
vehicle is not on the ego route. The ego vehicle maintains its lane
position while passing this stationary obstacle with adequate clearance,
proceeding at moderate speed with slight deceleration as it approaches
the stop sign area ahead. No other obstacles block the forward path, so
the vehicle continues cruising while staying alert to the open door and
pedestrian activity.
PLANNING CURVE · D — Bézier control points (m):
P1 (−0.25, 6.15) · P2 (−0.85, 11.85) · P3 (3.25, 18.05)
#1 lead pickup · 9.7 m
#1 pickup · 15.7 m
#2 rider · 11.1 m
#1 lead SUV · 11.6 m
#1 open-door car · 10 m
Fig. S1. Expanded qualitative GRA planning examples for Fig. 8 on NAVSIM: (a) signal-controlled STOP, (b) CRAWL for a queue and crossing rider, (c) CRUISE
as the queue resumes, and (d) CURVE around an open roadside door.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
19
(a) Signal and lead-vehicle hold
STOP
THINK The ego vehicle is stationary at a nighttime signalized intersection, waiting at a red
traffic light with navigation set to proceed straight. Directly ahead in the same lane at
approximately 8 meters is vehicle [#1], a stopped car with coordinates [-0.72, 7.93]
positioned at the stop line, completely blocking the forward path at 0.0 m/s. Since the traffic
signal is red and the lead vehicle remains stationary, the ego vehicle must maintain its
stopped position. Additionally, a cyclist is visible approaching from the left cross street at
roughly 19.6 meters distance, moving at 3.1 m/s across the pedestrian crosswalk; this
vulnerable road user will cross the intended path when the intersection opens, requiring
caution and monitoring before any future progression. With the immediate path obstructed
by the stopped lead vehicle and the red light mandating a halt, the ego vehicle stays in the
current lane, preserving a safe stationary position behind [#1] until the signal changes and
the intersection clears.
PLANNING STOP · D — endpoint (0.00, 0.00) m
(b) Construction-side clearance
CRUISE
THINK The ego vehicle proceeds straight on an urban road approaching an intersection,
with construction barriers and a stopped bus occupying the right side near a bus stop. The
lead vehicle [#1], a white sedan at [-0.60, 19.59] approximately 19.6 meters ahead in the
same lane, travels at 4.6 m/s, constraining the ego vehicle to decelerate and maintain safe
following distance. Meanwhile, the stationary bus in the right lane, together with nearby
pedestrians and roadside construction, reduces the effective road width on the right. To
ensure safe lateral clearance from these roadside hazards while continuing to follow the
lead vehicle, the ego vehicle slightly nudges left within the lane while decelerating.
PLANNING CRUISE · D — progress 18.30 m · lateral -0.04 m · final speed 4.50 m/s
(c) Wet-road queue restart
CRAWL
THINK The ego vehicle is stopped in a traffic queue on a straight multi-lane road
approaching an intersection, with rainy weather creating wet road surfaces. The navigation
route continues straight ahead. Immediately to the right, a large bus [#1] is positioned in
the adjacent lane at coordinates [2.61, 7.80], only 8.2 meters away and stationary; its
proximity significantly reduces the lateral safety margin, requiring the ego vehicle to nudge
left within the lane to maintain adequate clearance from this large adjacent vehicle. Ahead
in the same lane, vehicle [#2] serves as the lead vehicle at [0.32, 21.44], approximately
21.4 meters away and currently stopped as part of the queue. As the traffic ahead begins to
move, the ego vehicle will nudge slightly left for lateral safety while accelerating gradually to
resume forward progress, following the lead vehicle and maintaining appropriate spacing
within the queue.
PLANNING CRAWL · D — waypoints (m):
(0.00, 0.00) ×4 · (0.00, 0.20) · (0.00, 0.80) · (-0.04, 1.70) · (-0.12,
2.90)
(d) Pedestrian-constrained left turn
CURVE
THINK The ego vehicle approaches a signalized intersection at night with active
navigation guidance for a left turn, currently traveling at approximately 13 km/h. A red traffic
light and active pedestrian crosswalk constrain the maneuver. A pedestrian, identified as
[#1], is crossing the navigation path at coordinates [-0.70, 13.21], approximately 13.2
meters ahead and moving at 1.13 m/s, requiring the ego to yield. Further ahead, a stopped
lead vehicle [#2] occupies the same lane at [-4.10, 21.35], 21.75 meters away and
stationary at the stop line. Given the red signal, crossing pedestrians, and the stopped lead
vehicle, the ego vehicle decelerates to crawl speed while tracking the left-turn path,
preparing to proceed only after the signal changes and the crosswalk clears.
PLANNING CURVE · D — Bézier controls (m):
p1=(-1.44, 6.50) · p2=(-4.72, 12.00) · p3=(-6.82, 16.40)
#1 stopped lead car · 8.0 m
#1 lead sedan · 19.6 m
#1 adjacent bus · 8.2 m
#2 stopped lead · 21.4 m
#1 pedestrian · 13.2 m
#2 stopped lead · 21.8 m
Fig. S2. Qualitative GRA planning on the internal benchmark: (a) STOP behind a lead vehicle at a red signal, (b) CRUISE with lateral clearance from a construction
zone, (c) CRAWL in a wet-road queue, and (d) CURVE for a left turn constrained by a pedestrian.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
20
APPENDIX C
ACTIVE RL INFRASTRUCTURE
Active RL requires trajectory-level rewards for complete au-
toregressive sequences. We therefore separate rollout generation,
simulator scoring, and policy optimization into three services
while keeping the reasoning and action tokens within the same
rollout.
Rollout Server
N × GPU
GRA generation
planner trajectory
Sim-Engine
separate node
trajectory simulation
NAVSIM +
internal metrics
Training Nodes
3 × N × GPU
GRPO / DAPO
full-parameter update
trajectory
reward +
simulation details
model parameter sync
Fig. S3. Distributed infrastructure for Active RL. The rollout server sends
decoded trajectories to the sim-engine, which returns rewards and simulation
metadata to the training nodes. After each update, the training nodes synchronize
the model with the rollout server.
The rollout server runs vLLM on one node with eight H20
GPUs, tensor parallelism, a 4,096-token limit, and prefix caching.
The trainer updates all parameters on three nodes with eight
H20 GPUs each using PyTorch distributed data parallelism and
DeepSpeed ZeRO-2. A separate sim-engine node stores scene
caches and runs the dataset-specific evaluators.
a) Execution flow: For each prompt, the rollout server
samples eight reasoning-to-action sequences with the settings in
Section A-C. The fixed decoder converts each valid action into
an eight-waypoint trajectory. The server sends the trajectory and
the scene metadata required by the evaluator to the sim-engine.
The sim-engine returns a scalar reward and simulation details
keyed by the request identifier. The trainer updates a prompt
group after the sim-engine scores all eight completions. An
unparsable action receives zero reward. The trainer then nor-
malizes rewards within the group and applies Eq. (27) of the
main paper. It filters overlong completions and resamples zero-
variance groups under the limits in Section A-C. The training
nodes synchronize the model with the rollout server after each
update.
b) Simulator scoring API: The sim-engine uses one re-
quest format for two scoring modes. The NAVSIM and internal
modes return the aggregate and component scores defined in
Sections IV-A and IV-B of the main paper, respectively. The two
modes share the rollout and training code but use different scene
loaders and score adapters.
The reward client caches each simulator response so all reward
components reuse one evaluation. Active-set screening, online
RL, and checkpoint evaluation use the same endpoints. The
sim-engine runs independently of distributed training.
APPENDIX D
ANNOTATION-TIME ALIASES AND TRAINING-TIME
GROUNDING
GRA must preserve object identity across two interfaces: the
annotation LLM and perception tools exchange compact aliases,
whereas training requires image-region references. We therefore
convert each alias to a bounding-box token before constructing
Alias ->Object Grounding
Annotation-time: object_interaction
with aliases
G is the immediate leading vehicle in
the queue that ego must follow. It is
stopped at the intersection as part of
the orderly queueing situation, with
vehicle L in the adjacent right lane
also stopped.
Training-time: ObjectInteraction QA with grounding tokens
Q: How does vehicle <|box_start|>(434,478),(586,725)<|box_end|> interact
with other vehicles in the scene?
A: <|box_start|>(434,478),(586,725)<|box_end|> is the immediate leading
vehicle in the queue that ego must follow. It is stopped at the intersection as
part of the orderly queueing situation, with vehicle <|box_start|>(603,480),
(828,757)<|box_end|> in the adjacent right lane also stopped.
resolve alias
->grounding token
<|box_start|>
(434,478),(586,725)
<|box_end|>
<|box_start|>
(603,480),(828,757)
<|box_end|>
Takeaway: the alias is a stable pointer through annotation; 
training resolves it back to image pixels.
Fig. S4. Alias resolution from annotation to training. Short aliases maintain
object identity across annotation steps; training replaces them with bounding-box
tokens referring to the same image regions, preserving the interaction content.
training targets. Figure S4 shows this transition for objects G
and L without changing their interaction content.
a) Annotation-time: Each key object receives a short alias,
such as G or L, that links the outputs of the annotation LLM and
perception tools across graph-construction steps. Surround-view
cameras and a LiDAR-assisted perception tool provide its 3D
ego-frame state. Let πc(Pj) denote the two-dimensional image
extent obtained by projecting the 3D box Pj into camera c. We
retain the object only if this extent intersects a valid camera
image:
Oann =

j : ∃c ∈Sann,
πc(Pj) ∩Ωc̸ = ∅and zc(Pj) > 0
	
,
(S3)
where Sann is the surround-view camera set, Ωc is the image
extent of camera c, and zc(Pj) > 0 requires the object to be
in front of that camera. Objects outside every camera view are
dropped before aliases are assigned.
b) Training-time: Training may use a different camera
configuration from the annotation rig, such as a single front
camera or a smaller surround-view set. We therefore reproject
each annotated object into the training cameras Strain and keep
only those still visible:
Otrain =

j ∈Oann : ∃c ∈Strain,
πc(Pj) ∩Ωc̸ = ∅and zc(Pj) > 0
	
.
(S4)
For each retained object, we resolve its alias to a normalized
bounding-box token bj ∈[0, 1000)4 and discard references
outside the training view. Annotation intermediates may contain
aliases, but the resulting cognition and planning targets use
bounding-box tokens. Only the reference form changes: the
object-specific interaction and decision content remains intact.
Section E shows this training-time form in complete questions,
answers, and reasoning chains.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
21
APPENDIX E
COMPLETE GRA QA EXAMPLE
Fig. S5. Front-view observation shared by all 30 QA pairs in the complete GRA
transcript. The visual labels map to normalized boxes: R: (331,502),(418,629);
F: (482,494),(532,622); D: (645,481),(684,600); U: (187,523),(213,606).
The shared-supervision design in Sec. III-B derives cog-
nition targets from the same action-relevant graph used for
planning. Figure S5 and the transcript below show this pro-
jection for one NAVSIM frame through all 30 associated
GRA QA pairs. The questions are grouped by graph node
type and follow its dependency order: scene context, grounded
objects, interactions, object-level decisions, and the ego deci-
sion. Object references in the questions, answers, and reason-
ing chains use normalized bounding-box tokens of the form
<|box_start|>(x1,y1),(x2,y2)<|box_end|>, with coordinates on
a 0–1000 scale. The letter overlays in Figure S5 serve only as
visual lookup labels; the transcript uses the corresponding boxes
directly.
Scene Context
Q Please describe the current scene environment and the ego vehicle’s
status.
A The ego vehicle is approaching an intersection in an urban environment
with multi-lane roads. The front view shows a wide intersection with
buildings on the right side and open plaza area on the left. The ego vehicle
is positioned at the bottom of the image, preparing to execute a right turn.
Multiple vehicles are visible in the scene: vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|> is directly ahead in the same lane, vehicle
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is in the forward-left
position, vehicle <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> is on the
right side, and vehicle <|box_start|>(187,523),(213,606)<|box_end|> is on
the far left. The road structure shows a typical urban intersection with
crosswalks. The ego vehicle is currently moving at low speed (3.8 m/s ≈
14 km/h) with positive acceleration, indicating it is proceeding with the
right turn maneuver. The future trajectory shows a smooth rightward curve
consistent with a right turn navigation intent. No significant occlusion risks
are apparent, but vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>
ahead may require monitoring as the ego proceeds through the turn.
Q What traffic signs are visible in the current scene?
A A yellow diamond-shaped pedestrian crossing sign is visible in the front
view on the right side of the road, indicating a crosswalk area ahead. No
other clearly visible traffic signs, speed limit signs, or traffic lights are
discernible in the provided images.
Scene Context
continued
Q What navigation maneuver is the ego vehicle executing?
A The ego vehicle is executing a TURN RIGHT maneuver at the
intersection. Based on visual observation and available information, the
navigation path follows a right-turn curve. Vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|> is positioned directly ahead on the navigation line in
the same lane, approximately 15-20 meters ahead. Vehicle <|box_start|>
(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is located to the left-front of the ego
vehicle, and vehicle <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> is on the
right side. The ego vehicle should maintain its current lane position and
follow the right-turn trajectory while monitoring vehicle <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> ahead.
Q Please describe the current road congestion situation ahead of the ego
vehicle.
A The ego vehicle is currently BEFORE INTERSECTION (approaching
the stop line/crosswalk area). This is a queueing situation rather than
congestion - vehicles are orderly positioned waiting to proceed through the
intersection. In the front view and visible in the image, vehicle
<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is queueing directly ahead in
the same lane. Vehicle <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is in
the left adjacent lane, and vehicle <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|> is positioned to the right. There are approximately 3-4 vehicles
visible in the immediate queue ahead of the ego vehicle (including
<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>). The left lane also contains
vehicles (<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> and others further
ahead). The right lane appears to have vehicle <|box_start|>(645,481),
(684,600)<|box_end|>. The low speed (3.8 m/s) and positive acceleration
suggest the queue is beginning to move or the ego is approaching the
intersection control point. No abnormal congestion or blockage is observed
- this is normal intersection queueing behavior.
Grounded Object Perception
Q What are the location, distance, speed, and heading of vehicle
<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>?
A CAR type, coordinates [-3.26, 23.78, 0.44], distance 24.0m from ego,
speed 6.17m/s, heading 0.05 rad (approximately straight). <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is the leading vehicle on the navigation
path, occupying the ego vehicle’s driving corridor directly ahead.
Q What are the location, distance, speed, and heading of pedestrian
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>?
A PEDESTRIAN, coordinates [0.25, 21.85, 0.59], distance 21.9m from
ego, speed 1.37m/s, heading -2.15 rad. Located near the crosswalk area
forward-left of the ego vehicle, moving at walking speed.
Q What are the location, distance, speed, and heading of pedestrian
<|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>?
A PEDESTRIAN, coordinates [4.57, 23.62, 0.78], distance 24.1m from
ego, speed 1.53m/s, heading -1.85 rad. Located on the right side of the turn
path near the crosswalk area, moving slowly across the intersection.
Q Which obstacles in the current scene require the most attention?
A Critical obstacles are <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>,
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>, and <|box_start|>(645,481),
(684,600)<|box_end|>: <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is a
CAR directly ahead occupying the navigation path during the right turn,
approximately 24 meters away and moving at 6.17 m/s, acting as the
leading vehicle that limits the ego’s maximum speed; <|box_start|>
(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is a PEDESTRIAN located near the
crosswalk forward-left of the ego vehicle at 21.9 meters, moving at
walking speed and requiring caution as the ego traverses the crosswalk
area; <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> is a PEDESTRIAN
positioned on the right side of the turn path at 24.1 meters, also requiring
monitoring to ensure safe passage through the intersection.
Object Interactions
Vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>.
Q What is the current intention of vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|>?
A Proceeding straight through the intersection at steady speed, following
the traffic flow ahead.
Q Where is vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>
positioned relative to the ego’s navigation path?
A Located in the same lane ahead of the ego vehicle, directly on the
navigation path for the right turn. Based on visual analysis from the camera
view, there is no lane line separation between ego and <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>, confirming <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|> is the leading vehicle in the ego’s lane.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
22
Object Interactions
continued
Q How is vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>
interacting with other nearby objects?
A Following vehicles ahead in the traffic queue, with vehicle <|box_start|>
(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> positioned to the left-front and vehicle
<|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> to the right, forming part of
the multi-vehicle intersection queue.
Q What is vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>’s position
relative to the map?
A Located in the same lane ahead of the ego vehicle, directly on the
navigation path for the right turn. Based on visual analysis from the camera
view, there is no lane line separation between ego and <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>, confirming <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|> is the leading vehicle in the ego’s lane.
Q What impact does vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>
have on the ego vehicle?
A Acting as the leading vehicle that limits ego’s maximum speed and
requires maintaining safe following distance throughout the right turn
maneuver.
Q What additional information is available about vehicle <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>?
A CAR type, moving at 6.17 m/s with heading 0.05 rad (approximately
straight), distance 24.0m from ego. No brake lights visible, indicating
steady movement without deceleration.
Pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>.
Q What is the current intention of pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),
(532,622)<|box_end|>?
A Walking across the crosswalk or moving through the pedestrian crossing
area at the intersection.
Q Where is pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>
positioned relative to the ego’s navigation path?
A Located near the crosswalk that intersects with ego’s planned right-turn
trajectory through the intersection.
Q How is pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>
interacting with other nearby objects?
A Moving independently in the crosswalk area without direct interaction
with other vehicles.
Q What is pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>’s
position relative to the map?
A Located in the crosswalk area visible in the image, forward-left of ego
vehicle within the intersection pedestrian crossing zone, separated from
ego’s current lane by lane markings.
Q What impact does pedestrian <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)
<|box_end|> have on the ego vehicle?
A Not directly on ego’s planned path but located in the crosswalk area
where ego must traverse during the right turn, creating a potential conflict
point that requires vigilance.
Q What additional information is available about pedestrian <|box_start|>
(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>?
A Pedestrian moving at 1.37m/s (walking speed) with heading -2.15 rad,
distance 21.9m from ego, positioned near the crosswalk indicated by the
pedestrian crossing sign.
Pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>.
Q What is the current intention of pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),
(684,600)<|box_end|>?
A Walking across the crosswalk or along the intersection edge, moving
slowly through the pedestrian crossing area.
Q Where is pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>
positioned relative to the ego’s navigation path?
A Located on the right side of ego’s right-turn navigation path, within the
crosswalk area near the intersection.
Q How is pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>
interacting with other nearby objects?
A Interacting with the crosswalk environment as a pedestrian, potentially
crossing the street or waiting to cross.
Q What is pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>’s
position relative to the map?
A Located in the crosswalk/intersection area on the right side of ego’s turn
path, separated from ego’s lane by intersection geometry, within the
crosswalk zone visible in the image.
Q What impact does pedestrian <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|> have on the ego vehicle?
A Potential conflict during right turn as <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|> is positioned on the right side of the turn path; requires
monitoring to ensure pedestrian does not enter the turn radius or cross in
front of ego.
Object Interactions
continued
Q What additional information is available about pedestrian <|box_start|>
(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>?
A Yellow pedestrian crossing sign visible in front view indicating
crosswalk presence; slow walking speed of 1.53 m/s; distance 24.1 m;
heading -1.85 indicating movement across the intersection area.
Object Decisions
Q What decision did the ego vehicle make regarding vehicle <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>, and what is the reason?
A Think: The ego vehicle is executing a right turn maneuver at the
intersection. Vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is
identified as the leading vehicle positioned directly ahead on the navigation
path, approximately 24 meters away, traveling at 6.17 m/s in approximately
the same direction (heading 0.05). As the critical obstacle occupying the
driving corridor ahead with no lane line separation, <|box_start|>(331,502),
(418,629)<|box_end|> constrains the ego vehicle’s maximum allowable
speed and requires the ego to maintain a safe following distance. Since
<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is proceeding steadily
through the intersection without indications of stopping, lane changing, or
deviating from the path, the appropriate decision is to follow <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>, adjusting the ego’s speed to match the
traffic flow while maintaining safe separation throughout the right turn
completion.
Chain: scene_context.navigation (TURN RIGHT) |
scene_context.summary (<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>
directly ahead on navigation line) -> <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)
<|box_end|>.map_interaction (same lane, no separation) | <|box_start|>
(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>.motion_state (speed 6.17m/s, heading
0.05) -> <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>.ego_interaction
(leading vehicle constraint) -> Follow
Answer: Follow
Q What decision did the ego vehicle make regarding pedestrian
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>, and what is the reason?
A Think: The ego vehicle is executing a right turn at an intersection where
a pedestrian crossing sign is visible, indicating a crosswalk ahead. Critical
obstacle <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is a pedestrian
located forward-left near this crosswalk area, moving at a walking speed of
1.37m/s. Although <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> is not
directly on the ego vehicle’s planned trajectory (on_ego_path: false), the
right turn maneuver requires the ego vehicle to traverse the crosswalk area
where the pedestrian is present. Pedestrians in crosswalks have the right of
way, and the combination of the turning maneuver and the pedestrian’s
proximity to the crosswalk creates a potential conflict situation. Therefore,
the ego vehicle must exercise caution when proceeding with the right turn
to monitor the pedestrian’s movements and ensure safety.
Chain: scene_context.traffic_sign | scene_context.navigation ->
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>.map_interaction |
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>.motion_state -> <|box_start|>
(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>.ego_interaction -> decision
Answer: Caution
Q What decision did the ego vehicle make regarding pedestrian
<|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>, and what is the reason?
A Think: The front view shows a yellow diamond-shaped pedestrian
crossing sign on the right side, indicating a designated crosswalk area
ahead. The visual observation confirms that obstacle <|box_start|>
(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> is a pedestrian located in this crosswalk
area on the right side of the intersection at coordinates [4.57, 23.62],
approximately 24.1 meters from ego. <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|> is moving slowly at 1.53 m/s with heading -1.85. As ego
executes a right turn maneuver, <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|> is positioned on the right side of the turn path. Although
<|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> is not directly on the planned
trajectory (on_ego_path: false), the combination of the pedestrian crossing
sign, the crosswalk location, and the slow movement of the pedestrian
creates a potential interaction risk during the turn. Therefore, ego must
exercise caution to monitor <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>’s
movement closely, reduce speed if necessary, and ensure the pedestrian
does not enter the turn path or cross in front of the vehicle, maintaining
safety throughout the right turn maneuver.
Chain: scene_context.traffic_sign -> <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|>.map_interaction | <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|>.motion_state -> <|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)
<|box_end|>.ego_interaction -> Caution
Answer: Caution


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
23
Ego Decision
Q What is the ego vehicle’s overall driving strategy considering all
obstacles and navigation?
A Think: The ego vehicle is executing a right turn at an intersection with
vehicle <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> as the leading
obstacle directly ahead on the navigation path. The Follow decision for
<|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> requires adjusting ego speed
to match traffic flow; since <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|> is
moving faster (6.17 m/s) than ego’s current speed (3.8 m/s), this
necessitates acceleration to maintain appropriate following distance.
Pedestrians <|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|> and <|box_start|>
(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|> are positioned near crosswalk areas on the
left and right sides of the turn path respectively. While neither is directly on
the ego trajectory, the Caution decisions for both indicate potential
interaction risks during the right turn, requiring heightened vigilance. The
trajectory intent explicitly specifies turn_right laterally and accelerate
longitudinally. Synthesizing these factors: ego must execute the right turn
maneuver while accelerating to follow the leading vehicle, but remain
prepared to react to the pedestrians in the crosswalk zones.
Chain: <|box_start|>(331,502),(418,629)<|box_end|>.decision(Follow) |
<|box_start|>(482,494),(532,622)<|box_end|>.decision(Caution) |
<|box_start|>(645,481),(684,600)<|box_end|>.decision(Caution) |
scene_context.navigation(TURN_RIGHT) | trajectory_intent(turn_right,
accelerate) -> ego_decision(turn_right, accelerate)
Answer: lateral: turn_right | longitudinal: accelerate
APPENDIX F
GROUNDED QUESTION-ANSWERING EVALUATION
PROTOCOL
A. Evaluation Set and Judge
The class-balanced held-out set tests the cognition capabilities
supporting Sec. V-E and does not overlap with training data.
Following Sec. D, all object references are converted to bounding
boxes; samples without a valid box in the evaluation view are
excluded before inference. The same normalized image region
is rendered in each model’s native box syntax.
MiniMax-M3 scores open-ended answers at temperature 0
and is not evaluated itself. This text-only judge receives the QA
type, subtype, scoring focus, question, reference, and candidate
answer. Decision subtypes instead use label accuracy.
B. Scoring Definitions
Each subtype uses the scoring rule associated with the
capability it measures. All reported scores range from 0 to 10.
a) Scene and interaction (LLM judge): The judge scores
grounding from 0 to 2, semantic correctness from 0 to 4,
reasoning alignment from 0 to 2, and factual consistency from
0 to 2. Dimensions relevant to each subtype are normalized
to [0, 10]. The reference is one valid answer rather than an
exhaustive checklist, so omissions and correct additions are not
penalized. Contradictions, hallucinations, and vague answers
lower the score.
b) Object perception (3D localization): For perception
questions with a reference 3D position, a localization score
replaces the grounding dimension. It uses the Euclidean error
between predicted and reference ego-frame positions,
loc = 2 exp(−∥ˆp −p∗∥2/τ) ,
τ = 5 m,
(S5)
where ˆp and p∗are the predicted and reference (x, y) positions.
Missing coordinates receive loc = 0; questions without a single
target position use the judge grounding score. The localization
and remaining judge dimensions are normalized to [0, 10]. All
models follow the ego-frame convention in Sec. F-C.
c) Decision (label accuracy): Object decisions use exact
match over Follow, Yield, Stop, Nudge Left, Nudge Right,
Overtake, and Caution. Ego decisions use the mean exact
match of a lateral label (keep_lane, nudge_left, nudge_right,
lane_change, turn_left, or turn_right) and a longitudinal label
(accelerate, cruise, decelerate, decelerate_to_crawl, or stop).
Scores are scaled to [0, 10], and negated mentions are ignored.
C. Prompts
a) Perception coordinate prompt: Every model receives the
same system prompt, which defines the ego-frame coordinates
and the localization output format:
You are a driving-scene 3D perception assistant. Given a single
front-camera image and the ego state, estimate the 3D position of
the queried obstacle in the EGO VEHICLE frame (units = meters):
x = lateral offset, positive to the RIGHT
y = longitudinal distance, positive AHEAD
z = height above ground
distance = sqrt(x^2 + y^2)
Answer on the first line in this exact format, then one sentence:
coordinates [x, y, z], distance <D>m, speed <S>m/s, heading <H> rad
b) Judge prompt (open-ended subtypes): The evaluator supplies
the QA type, subtype, focus, active dimensions, question,
reference, and candidate answer. The common rubric below
defines scoring and JSON output:
Judge an autonomous-driving QA answer. Score only the active
dimensions for this subtype:
grounding (0-2), semantic_correctness (0-4),
reasoning_alignment (0-2), factual_consistency (0-2)
Scoring philosophy - precision over recall:
- The reference is ONE valid answer, not a checklist. Do NOT
penalize omissions if what the candidate says is correct.
- Correct extra information is NOT penalized.
- DO penalize statements that contradict the reference/scene:
wrong decision, wrong object role, wrong signal state,
hallucinated objects, self-contradiction. Each wrong claim
lowers the score.
- Vague/evasive answers that do not commit get low
semantic_correctness, not credit for "not being wrong".
Return JSON: {"grounding":.., "semantic_correctness":..,
"reasoning_alignment":.., "factual_consistency":..,
"wrong_claims":[...], "rationale":".."}
D. Subtype-to-GRA Mapping
The thirteen subtypes follow the GRA graph from scene
context through grounded objects and interactions to decisions.
a) Scene: Summary covers road layout, surrounding traffic,
and overall context; Traffic sign covers visible signs and control
states, including their absence; Navigation covers the intended
maneuver, route-lane relation, and intersection context; Con-
gestion distinguishes free flow, normal queueing, and abnormal
blockage.
b) Object perception: Critical object description covers
grounding, type, position, distance, speed, and heading. Critical
object identification asks which objects constrain ego motion
and what roles they play.
c) Object interaction: Intention evaluates a referenced
object’s expected behavior. Navigation interaction asks whether
it affects the ego route; object interaction covers relations
with other traffic participants; map interaction covers lanes,
boundaries, and road structure; and ego interaction covers its
effect on ego speed, path, safety margin, or right of way.
d) Decision: Object decision evaluates the response to one
critical object; Ego decision evaluates the lateral and longitudinal
strategy after combining object-level constraints.
