Title: CLAMP: Constrained Decoding for Vision-Language Embodied Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.08602v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 04:01:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# CLAMP: Constrained Decoding for Vision-Language Embodied Planning 

Tianyi Ma Parisa Kordjamshidi 

Michigan State University 

matiany3@msu.edu, kordjams@msu.edu 

Abstract 

Embodied planning increasingly relies on vision-language models (VLMs) to translate instructions and visual observations into ex-ecutable action sequences. However, fluent plans are not always executable. A VLM may refer to objects that are not visually ob-served, select actions whose required affor-dances are unavailable, or violate syntax and ac-tion constraints. We introduce CLAMP , a mul-timodal constraint-grounding framework that turns scene evidence into decoding-time con-straints for a frozen VLM planner. CLAMP uses the initial observation to restrict object ref-erences to those supported by the scene, while a provided symbolic action model specifies state transitions and goals. During decoding, hard masks eliminate invalid next-token candidates, while a Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-based world-state lookahead module reweights the probabilities of the remaining feasible candi-dates based on action preconditions and goal reachability. This allows the planner to retain the VLM’s language prior while preventing vi-sually unsupported, unsafe, or infeasible candi-dates from entering the plan. For unseen tasks and environments, CLAMP adapts the HMM at test time using label-free continuations sam-pled from the frozen VLM. Experiments on VLABench, SafeAgentBench, and TaPA show that scene-grounded constraints improve object grounding and safety, while most remaining failures stem from perception errors or mis-aligned constraint specifications. 

1 Introduction 

Embodied planning requires an agent to translate multimodal observations and natural-language in-structions into executable action sequences. Vision-language models (VLMs) provide a powerful in-terface for this task (Wu et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024), but their  

> Code: https://github.com/HLR/CLAMP

generated plans do not necessarily satisfy the con-straints required for execution. A useful plan must therefore do more than match the instruction: its actions must be well-formed, grounded in the ob-served scene, and feasible under the current world state. Existing approaches often handle execution con-straints through post-hoc verification or repair (Li et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b), allowing invalid decisions to propagate before they are cor-rected. Constrained decoding (Zhang et al., 2024a; Kapoor et al., 2025; Geng et al., 2023) instead en-forces constraints during generation, but existing methods primarily target language generation or specialized policy outputs. Embodied planning presents a different challenge: constraints must be grounded in multimodal observations and evolve with the world state. We propose C LAMP , a multimodal constrained decoding framework for embodied planning based on a frozen VLM. C LAMP combines hard con-straints that restrict invalid generations with world-state guidance that steers the planner among valid actions. Specifically, C LAMP uses observation-conditioned DFAs to enforce hard constraints dur-ing decoding, restricting generation to actions that are syntactically valid and grounded in the cur-rent observation. It further employs HMM-based state tracking to capture the evolving world state and provide lookahead guidance for subsequent actions. To handle domain shift, C LAMP adapts the lightweight guidance model at test time while keeping the VLM frozen. We evaluate C LAMP on multimodal embodied-planning benchmarks covering task execution, vi-sual grounding, and safety. On VLABench (Zhang et al., 2025), observation-conditioned hard con-straints improve Qwen3-VL-8B from 28 .7 to 34 .1,while world-state guidance further increases per-formance to 37 .1 and 38 .7 with text- and vision-arXiv:2609.08602v1 [cs.AI] 8 Sep 2026 conditioned guidance, respectively. On SafeAgent-Bench (Yin et al., 2024), constrained planning re-duces symbolic-rule violations from 0.41 to 0.05 .These results indicate that enforcing constraints during decoding improves both task-level planning and constraint satisfaction without updating or scal-ing the underlying VLM. The additional computa-tional overhead remains modest because constraint enforcement and adaptation operate on lightweight components around the frozen planner. Ablations further confirm the complementary roles of hard constraint enforcement and world-state guidance. Our contributions are threefold: • A multimodal constraint-decoding frame-work. We introduce C LAMP , which integrates observation-conditioned hard constraint enforce-ment, world-state guidance, and lightweight test-time adaptation for embodied planning. • Constraint-preserving test-time adaptation. 

We introduce lightweight HMM adaptation for CLAMP , using unlabeled frozen-VLM continu-ations to recalibrate its guidance on new tasks while preserving the constraints. • Effective and efficient constraint enforcement. 

CLAMP improves embodied planning, grounding, and safety with modest additional computation cost. 

2 Related Work 

Embodied planning with language and vision-language models. Language-conditioned plan-ners have been used with symbolic planners, task-and-motion pipelines, and household simu-lators (Garrett et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025). These systems differ in where they enforce constraints. Prompt-based planners rely on the model to follow a textual description, while monitor-and-repair systems inspect a plan after gen-eration or after an execution failure (Yang et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2026). C LAMP instead applies a supplied interface while a high-level plan is decoded. It is not a re-placement for motion planning, state estimation, or execution monitoring. 

Constrained decoding. Grammar and finite-state constrained decoding enforce requirements such as schemas, regular languages, and struc-tured outputs at generation time (Scholak et al., 2021; Poesia et al., 2022; Willard and Louf, 2023; Geng et al., 2023; Ugare et al., 2025; Dong et al., 2025; Kamali and Kordjamshidi, 2026; Kamali et al., 2026). C TRL -G combines hard constraints with HMM-based lookahead for language gen-eration and provides the decoding backbone for CLAMP (Zhang et al., 2024a). S AFE DEC instead applies decode-time safety control to low-level robot-policy tokens under an assumed dynamics model (Kapoor et al., 2025). C LAMP extends con-strained decoding to high-level embodied planning, where constraints are grounded in multimodal ob-servations and depend on the evolving world state. In principle, a finite token automaton can encode bounded action history by state expansion. For episode-specific visibility and symbolic precondi-tions, however, this couples the token grammar to the current world state and yields a large product au-tomaton; C LAMP keeps the token and action-state detectors separate (Appendix A5.1). 

Visual grounding and safety. VLM planners can use observations to select subgoals and interact with task-and-motion components (Wu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2025; Rajpal et al., 2026; Ma et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025). Safety benchmarks show that task completion and constraint compliance can diverge in embodied settings (Yin et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2026). CLAMP uses visibility as its mul-timodal constraint: scene evidence constructs a separate entity-support channel rather than treating image conditioning as a guarantee of grounded ref-erences. Accordingly, we report visual-grounding and constraint-enforcement probes separately. 

3 Preliminaries 

We consider embodied planning with a task speci-fied by (ℓ, o 0, γ, C, K max ), where ℓ denotes the in-struction; o0 ∈ O denotes the initial multimodal ob-servation, with O being the multimodal observation space; γ denotes the task-provided action schema specifying action signatures, argument structures, and canonical entity information; C denotes the planning constraints that the decoded plan must satisfy, with satisfaction determined based on the corresponding task information; and Kmax denotes the maximum action horizon. The goal is to gen-erate an executable action plan satisfying C within the prescribed horizon. Let a0: T = ( a0, . . . , a T ) denote the final exe-cutable plan. The plan length is T + 1 ≤ Kmax ,and the plan satisfies the constraints denoted as 

a0: T |= C. Executing this plan starting from o0

yields a final observation oT +1 , and task success is Task inputs Frozen VLM + constrained decoding Grounded action plan                  

> Observation
> wrist side front overhead
> Initial multi-view observation
> Insert the rose into vase_seen.
> Instruction
> Frozen VLM
> Raw logits CLAMP decoding
> Select token
> Token sequence
> pick (rose )…
> -parser
> Actions
> pick(rose) insert(rose,vase_seen)
> Syntax mask
> Task interface
> Schema · Budget
> pick(object)
> insert(object,target)
> Syntax
> insert(object, target) insert (rose )

×       

> Missing target argument
> Visibility
> vase_seen ✓
> vase_hidden ×
> Observed entities
> Reachability
> insert first ×
> pick insert
> HMM + DP: goal within budget
> Feed prefix back to VLM Visibility mask Reachability mask + lookahead Condition on Compile task constraints

Figure 1: Overview of C LAMP on an illustrative rose-and-vase task. Syntax and visibility constraints enforce the action schema and observation-supported entity references. A state-conditioned reachability constraint retains candidate tokens whose extended action prefixes admit executable action completions. HMM-based lookahead further scores the remaining candidates using the probability mass of executable continuations that reach the goal within the remaining action budget. The three masks and the weighted lookahead score modify frozen-VLM logits during autoregressive generation, and the resulting token sequence is parsed into an action plan. 

measured by a success score ˆg(oT +1 ; ℓ) ∈ [0 , 1] .In our framework, a frozen autoregressive VLM serves as the planning policy πθ and generates a token sequence y1: N = ( y1, . . . , y N ), which is sub-sequently converted into an executable action plan. The sequence contains action expressions and the formatting required by the output schema; reason-ing text may also appear when the schema explic-itly permits a separate reasoning field. Since a single action may span multiple tokens, the token length N need not equal the action horizon T + 1 .The generated token sequence is converted into an executable plan via a deterministic parser τγ ,with τγ (y1: N ) = a0: T , while w : Aγ → V ∗ de-notes a token serialization of an executable action under γ. The parser identifies token spans cor-responding to completed action expressions and parses them according to the action signatures, ar-gument structures, and canonical entity informa-tion specified by γ. For example, a sequence of tokens [ Pick ,(,red ,_cup ,_2 ,)] may jointly form the action expression Pick(red_cup_2) , which τγ

maps to a single executable action at. Conversely, under the same schema, w(Pick(red_cup_2) ) = [Pick , (, red , _cup , _2 , )] gives a token serializa-tion of the executable action. The parser distin-guishes action names and entity arguments from punctuation, separators, and any schema-permitted reasoning fields; these auxiliary tokens do not them-selves create actions. Let Aγ denote the executable action space induced by γ, so that at ∈ A γ . Mem-bership in this space means compatibility with the executor-facing action interface; state-dependent executability is specified separately. Throughout decoding, the VLM is conditioned on (ℓ, o 0, γ, y <n ), with its observation input fixed at o0. Intermediate execution observations 

o1, . . . , o T and the final success score ˆg(oT +1 ; ℓ)

are not used as generation-time feedback. 

4 Method 

Given the embodied planning setting, our goal is to generate an executable plan that satisfies the task constraints C within the prescribed action horizon 

Kmax , while keeping the VLM policy πθ frozen. To this end, CLAMP performs constrained decod-ing over the VLM-generated token sequence, ex-pressing the planning constraints at the token level and enforcing them directly during autoregressive generation. Let V denote the VLM token vocabulary. We use the next-token log-probability as the base decoding score for candidate v ∈ V at step n:

ℓn(v) = log πθ (v | ℓ, o 0, γ, y <n ) , v ∈ V. 

CLAMP incorporates the planning constraints by modifying these scores during decoding, as de-tailed below. 

4.1 Embodied Planning Constraints 

In the embodied planning setting, we define the overall constraint set as C = {C syn , Cvis , Crch },where Csyn denotes the syntax constraint, requir-ing each generated action to conform to the task-provided action schema; Cvis denotes the visibil-ity constraint, requiring every entity referenced by the generated actions to be grounded in the visual observation o0; and Crch denotes the reachability constraint, requiring the generated action sequence to be consistent with the evolving task state and to reach a goal within the given action budget. 

Syntax Constraint. The syntax constraint Csyn 

requires the generated action sequence to conform to the task-provided action schema γ. Formally, 

a0: T |= Csyn ⇐⇒ at ∈ A γ , ∀t ∈ { 0, . . . , T },

with a0: T serialized according to the format speci-fied by γ, where Aγ denotes the executable action space induced by γ.

Visibility Constraint. The visibility constraint 

Cvis requires every entity referenced by the gen-erated actions to be grounded in the initial vi-sual observation o0. Let Eseen denote the set of observation-supported entity identifiers extracted from o0 and aligned with the canonical identifiers in γ. For an action at, let args( at) denote the enti-ties referenced by the action. Then, 

a0: T |= Cvis ⇐⇒ args( at) ⊆ E seen , ∀t ∈ { 0,. . . ,T }.

Reachability Constraint. The syntax and visibil-ity constraints enforce local validity during action construction, but they do not guarantee that the resulting action sequence is executable under the evolving task state or that it can reach the goal within the given action budget. An action can sat-isfy both Csyn and Cvis while remaining infeasible in the current state because its execution conditions are not satisfied. Moreover, even when every se-lected action is executable at the time of execution, the resulting action sequence may require too many steps to reach the task goal within the given action budget. Accordingly, the reachability constraint is de-fined as 

a0: T |= Crch ⇐⇒ Reachable( a0: T ; Kmax ),

where Reachable( a0: T ; Kmax ) holds if the se-quence is executable under the evolving task state, terminates in a task-specified goal state and satisfies 

T +1 ≤ Kmax . Appendix A4.3 gives visibility and executability examples illustrating why the three constraints are complementary. 

4.2 Constrained Decoding 

CLAMP enforces these planning constraints dur-ing decoding by evaluating each candidate token against the corresponding constraints and modify-ing its next-token logit accordingly. For each con-straint i ∈ { syn , vis , rch }, let mi,n (v) ∈ { 0, 1}

indicate whether candidate token v is admissible under constraint i at decoding step n. We use 

log mi,n (v) = 0 for an admissible token and −∞ 

otherwise, so any invalid candidate receives zero probability after softmax. Specifically, at decoding step n,

˜ℓn(v) = ℓn(v) + log msyn ,n (v)

| {z }

> Csyn

+ log mvis ,n (v)

| {z }

> Cvis

+ log mrch ,n (v) + λG rch ,n (v)

| {z }

> Crch

.

(1) The score Grch ,n (v) aggregates hidden Markov model (HMM)-weighted goal-reaching continua-tions under the symbolic transition model and the remaining action budget. Its contribution is con-trolled by λ ≥ 0; when λ = 0 , the entire future-reachability term is omitted. For each i ∈ {syn , vis , rch }, let Di =(Qi, Σi, δ i, q i, 0, F i) denote an automaton represent-ing the corresponding constraint. The syntax and visibility automata operate directly on tokens, with 

Σsyn = Σ vis = V , whereas the reachability au-tomaton reads completed actions, with Σrch = Aγ .Despite operating at different levels, all three con-straints are enforced through the token-level masks in Eq. 1. Syntax and visibility determine admissi-ble tokens directly from their token-level automata. Reachability instead maps candidate tokens to com-patible action completions and checks those actions against the action-level automaton, as defined be-low. 

4.2.1 Prefix-local Filtering 

The syntax and visibility constraints can be eval-uated directly from the current token prefix. Be-fore decoding, we instantiate Dsyn from the action schema γ and Dvis from Eseen . The former recog-nizes valid serialized actions and their surrounding format, including the required punctuation and sep-arators, while the latter restricts entity-argument positions to observation-supported identifiers. For either automaton, qi,n denotes the state after pro-cessing y<n , with qi, 1 = qi, 0. A candidate token 

v is admissible if taking its transition from qi,n preserves at least one accepting completion. This gives the binary mask 

mi,n (v) = 

(

1, if δi(qi,n , v ) can reach Fi,

0, otherwise .

4.2.2 State-conditioned Executability Filtering 

State-conditioned filtering retains candidate tokens that can still be completed into an action executable from the current state. We describe the symbolic action transitions underlying this token-level filter by 

Drch = ( Z, Aγ , ∆, z 0, F rch ),

where Z is the state space, Aγ is the schema-defined action space, ∆ is the action-level tran-sition function, z0 is the initial state, and Frch ⊆ Z 

is the set of goal states. The task specification pro-vides z0 and Frch , while action preconditions and effects determine ∆. This automaton is fixed be-fore decoding, with ∆( z, a ) undefined when the preconditions of a are not satisfied in z. For any state z ∈ Z , define the executable-action set as 

Aexe (z) = {a ∈ A γ : ∆( z, a ) is defined }.

Let t denote the number of actions fully gen-erated and parsed so far, and let zt ∈ Z de-note the state obtained by applying these actions, 

a0, . . . , a t−1, under ∆. During decoding, Aexe (zt)

is queried at the current state zt, which remains unchanged while the next action is generated token by token. Once the parser τγ identifies a completed action at, the state advances to zt+1 = ∆( zt, a t).To apply these action-level transitions during to-ken decoding, the serialization map w : Aγ → V ∗

associates each action with its token sequence un-der γ. An unfinished action prefix may match sev-eral such sequences. Formally, let bt denote the token index immediately before the current action span begins. At decoding step n, the previously generated tokens of the current action form the pre-fix pt,n = ybt+1: n−1. Let ◦ denote token-sequence concatenation and x ⪯ u mean that x is a prefix of 

u. For a candidate token v inside an action span, let 

An(v) denote the complete actions whose token se-rializations are compatible with the extended prefix 

pt,n ◦v: An(v) = {a ∈ A γ : pt,n ◦ v ⪯ w(a)} . In-tersecting this set with the actions executable from 

zt gives Aexe ,n (v; zt) = An(v) ∩ A exe (zt). The corresponding token mask is 

mrch ,n (v) = 

(

1, if Aexe ,n (v; zt)̸ = ∅,

0, otherwise .

Immediate executability does not guarantee that an action’s successor state admits a goal-reaching continuation within the remaining action bud-get. Section 4.2.3 augments this executability mask with budget-aware future reachability. Ap-pendix A1.2 illustrates token filtering and action-boundary state updates, while Appendix A1.4 de-scribes parser handling of alternative spacing and punctuation. 

4.2.3 Budget-aware Future Reachability 

To score future goal reachability, we combine the action-level DFA with a discrete HMM. For each candidate token, the lookahead evaluates its com-patible executable action completions and the con-tinuations from their successor states within the remaining action budget. 

Action-level backward reachability. The HMM has parameters ϕ = ( μ, A, B ), where μ is the ini-tial distribution over latent states H, A is the tran-sition matrix, and B is the emission matrix. For an action a with token serialization w(a), let 

Fa[h, h ′] := log Pϕ

 w(a), h |w(a)| = h′ | h0 = h

denote the HMM log-probability of generating 

w(a) while transitioning from latent state h to 

h′. We maintain the joint forward log-probability 

ρn[h] = log Pϕ(y1: n, h n = h) over the generated prefix. Lookahead scores canonical action continu-ations; it does not marginalize over arbitrary future reasoning text or formatting variants. Details of both computations are given in Appendix A1.1. Let K denote the number of complete actions that may still be generated. For reachability state 

z ∈ Z , HMM state h ∈ H , and remaining action budget K, define R[K, z, h ] as the HMM-weighted log-probability mass of executable action continua-tions that reach a goal state in Frch within at most 

K additional actions. The boundary conditions are R[K, z, h ] = 0 

for z ∈ Frch and R[0 , z, h ] = −∞ for z / ∈ Frch .Reaching a goal ends the scored continuation, so the first boundary condition assigns unit mass to successful termination. Let LSE denote log-sum-exp, which marginalizes over executable actions and their possible successor HMM states. For K > 

0 and z / ∈ Frch , the backward recursion is 

R[K, z, h ] = LSE a∈A exe (z)

> h′∈H

Fa[h, h ′]+ R K − 1, ∆( z, a ), h ′  .Each term evaluates one executable next action by combining its HMM segment score with the future reachability of its successor state. 

Candidate-token reachability score. We finally project the action-level backward reachability com-putation onto candidate tokens. For candidate to-ken v, the set Aexe ,n (v; zt) contains the complete actions that are both compatible with the extended token prefix and executable from the current reach-ability state zt.Let ρbt denote the HMM forward log-belief at the beginning of the current action. The budget-aware reachability score for candidate token v is 

Grch ,n (v) = LSE a∈A exe ,n (v;zt)

> h,h ′∈H

h

ρbt [h]+ Fa[h, h ′] + R[Kmax − t − 1, ∆( zt, a ), h ′]

i

− LSE h∈H ρbt [h].

If Aexe ,n (v; zt) = ∅, we set Grch ,n (v) =

−∞ . Otherwise, Grch ,n (v) aggregates the future-reachability mass of the compatible executable ac-tions. The final term normalizes the HMM belief at the action start, removing the likelihood of the already generated prefix. Since t actions have al-ready been committed, completing the current ac-tion leaves Kmax −t−1 actions for the continuation. The score is evaluated only when t < K max and the observed prefix has positive HMM probability. The two components of Crch in Eq. (1) serve complementary roles. The hard mask mrch ,n (v) re-moves token extensions with no executable action completion. For λ > 0, a score of Grch ,n (v) = 

−∞ also excludes candidates with no HMM-supported goal-reaching continuation within bud-get; finite scores rank the remaining candidates. Thus, a nonempty action-completion set alone does not imply a finite future-reachability score. 

4.2.4 Decoding and State Updates 

Action-completion masks and scores apply when constructing an action. For grammar-permitted tokens outside action spans, their reachability contributions are neutral, mrch ,n (v) = 1 and 

Grch ,n (v) = 0 , subject to the termination and bud-get checks below. A plan terminator is admissi-ble only at an action boundary with zt ∈ Frch 

and a syntactically complete serialization. Once 

t = Kmax , no further action may be started. Af-ter applying the constraint masks and reachability score, decoding returns F AIL if the action budget is exhausted with zt /∈ Frch or if all candidate tokens have ˜ℓn(v) = −∞ , in which case generation ter-minates without a complete valid plan. Otherwise, the next token is sampled as yn ∼ softmax( ˜ℓn).After selecting yn, each token-level DFA state is updated according to its transition function. The reachability state zt remains unchanged while the current action is being generated. Once the parser identifies a completed action at, the action is com-mitted and the reachability state is updated as 

zt+1 = ∆( zt, a t).

4.2.5 Test-Time Adaptation 

To improve the generalization of C LAMP to new tasks, we adapt its HMM at test time. Because the HMM is learned from source-task data, its to-ken probabilities can become miscalibrated under task shift, weakening the guidance used for con-strained decoding. We therefore use test-time adap-tation (TTA) to recalibrate the HMM from unla-beled target-task sequences (Liang et al., 2024). We adapt only the emission matrix B, which directly maps latent states to observed tokens and is therefore most directly exposed to task-specific changes in the observed sequences. In contrast, μ

and A encode the source HMM’s initial-state and transition dynamics. Restricting adaptation to B

provides a lightweight fast-weight update (Feng et al., 2026) while keeping the latent dynamics and symbolic constraints fixed. Thus, adaptation recalibrates the HMM guidance Grch ,n in Eq. (1) without changing the symbolic feasible set. At test time, we sample a small set of unla-beled instances from the target benchmark and use the frozen VLM to generate unconstrained con-tinuations. These continuations provide the self-supervision for adapting B: each generated token 

yn+1 serves as the next-token target conditioned on the preceding sequence y1: n. We minimize 

LTTA (B) = − 

> N−1

X

> n=0

log Pϕ(yn+1 | y1: n),

and update B with an emission-only Baum–Welch step (Baum et al., 1970). No ground-truth plans or action labels from the target benchmark are used. We consider three adaptation scopes: TTDA 

adapts across the target domain before evaluation, 

OTTA updates sequentially from completed test in-stances, and TTBA performs prompt-specific adap-tation before constrained decoding. Appendix A1.7 provides the full update algorithm, adaptation pro-Method M&T ↑ Spatial ↑ ComSense ↑ Semantic ↑ PhysLaw ↑ Complex ↑ Macro ↑                                                                                                

> Reference VLM baselines from (Zhang et al., 2025) (zero-/one-shot, no constraints)
> GLM-4V-9B (0-shot) 25.0 24.1 18.7 22.9 41.8 10.8 23.9 GPT-4-turbo-2024-04-09 33.4 29.5 22.2 28.8 7.9 19.0 23.5 GPT-4o-2024-08-06 26.7 24.1 16.2 25.1 29.1 30.8 25.3 InternVL2-8B 10.7 8.4 8.8 14.2 25.2 11.8 13.2 LLaVA-NeXT 16.1 11.7 14.7 21.8 5.9 4.4 12.4 MiniCPM-V 2.6 22.2 18.6 19.2 22.5 13.7 8.9 17.5 Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 34.6 25.8 29.1 35.1 19.4 14.2 26.4
> VL-main: Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct, matched inference-only configurations
> Baseline 38.5 28.0 30.4 36.8 22.6 16.1 28.7
> +syntax–visibility DFA 46.7 33.6 36.2 41.0 27.4 19.8 34.1
> +text HMM 51.4 36.5 39.1 43.9 29.9 21.5 37.1
> Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct: additional supervision and calibration
> +supervised vision HMM 53.8 38.2 40.7 45.3 31.4 22.6 38.7
> CLAMP on InternVL3.5-8B (matched four-dimension subset)
> Baseline 25.5 25.7 23.5 22.4 –––
> +CLAMP 61.7 44.3 54.6 46.2 –––

Table 1: VLABench planning results. M&T, ComSense, and PhysLaw denote Mesh and Texture, Common Sense, and Physical Laws. Scores range from 0 to 100 ; higher is better. Macro is the unweighted mean of the six dimension scores. Dashes indicate unevaluated dimensions. Bold and underlined values indicate the best and second-best results, respectively. 

tocols, anchoring strategies, computational details, and stability conditions. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate how syntax, visibility, and reachability constraints affect embodied planning, and further examine the contributions of HMM-based guidance and test-time adaptation. 

Benchmarks and metrics. VLABench (Zhang et al., 2025) evaluates multimodal action planning across six ability dimensions. For the matched Qwen comparison, we report six VL-main di-mension scores and their unweighted mean on 480 prompts. Published-reference and InternVL scores use their respective metric definitions (Ap-pendix A2.5). We use InternVL-based VLABench evaluation and TaPA (Wu et al., 2023) to analyze object grounding. SafeAgentBench (Yin et al., 2024) evaluates safety-policy compliance using semantic judgments and a symbolic rule checker. We adopt the Action Sequencing and Subgoal De-composition evaluations of the Embodied Agent Interface (EAI) benchmark on VirtualHome, re-porting task success and execution success sepa-rately (Puig et al., 2018; Li et al., 2024). We ad-ditionally use BEHAVIOR (Li et al., 2023, 2024) action-sequencing continuations as the target do-main for calibrating a VirtualHome-trained HMM (Appendix A3.7). 

Backbones and configurations. Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025) is the primary multimodal planner. InternVL3.5-8B (Wang et al., 2025) pro-vides a second-backbone evaluation, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) is used for text-only planning. All planner parameters remain frozen. The unconstrained baseline generates plans directly. The token configuration enforces action syntax through Csyn , and the grounded configura-tion additionally restricts entity references through 

Cvis . The world configuration adds state-dependent action feasibility and HMM-based goal lookahead. Safety policies, recovery, and emission adaptation are enabled in the corresponding experiments. Ap-pendix A2.2 specifies the inputs, HMM training data, and settings for each evaluation track. 

5.1 Planning Performance Multimodal planning on VLABench. We first compare constrained planning configurations using the same Qwen3-VL backbone and 480 VLABench prompts. Table 1 reports these matched con-figurations alongside published VLM results for context and a matched four-dimension evalua-tion on InternVL3.5-8B. The published results use VLABench’s official weighted planning score, whereas the Qwen3 configurations report six VL-main dimension scores and their unweighted macro average; the InternVL evaluation uses the local score defined in Appendix A2.5. Combining syn-tax and visibility constraints with text-HMM guid-ance increases the Qwen3 macro planning score from 28 .7 to 37 .1, with improvements across all six dimensions. Hard constraints alone reach 34 .1,and text-HMM guidance contributes a further 3.0

points. The two components therefore provide com-plementary gains: hard constraints restrict the ac-tion interface, while HMM guidance changes the selection among permitted continuations. The su-pervised vision-HMM configuration, which addi-tionally uses paired ground-truth skills and images with per-instance calibration, reaches 38 .7.

State-aware planning on VirtualHome. State-dependent guidance also improves planning be-yond action-interface constraints. In the matched EAI VirtualHome evaluation with frozen Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Action Sequencing task success increases from 21 .3% for the baseline to 48 .7% 

with token constraints and 85 .3% with world-state guidance. Subgoal Decomposition task success increases from 60 .1% to 79 .8% over token con-straints (Appendix A3.2, Figure 5 (a)). These gains support conditioning action selection on symbolic state and future goal reachability. 

5.2 Visual Grounding Analysis 

To identify which aspects of generated plans ben-efit from constrained decoding, we compare base-line and C LAMP outputs using frozen InternVL3.5-8B. Figure 2 separates changes in format validity, entity-ID validity, skill and entity matching, ex-act match, and the aggregate score. CLAMP re-stricts the frozen model to observation-supported entity identifiers but does not add new visual knowl-edge. CLAMP substantially improves entity validity and matching, while format validity re-mains perfect and skill matching changes little. The gains therefore primarily reflect better grounding of entity arguments to the scene-specific interface. On TaPA, visibility filtering only marginally re-duces out-of-scene references and improves judged success, without outperforming the unconstrained baseline. Appendix A3.9 reports the room-level results and the sensitivity of the self-judge to eval-uation metadata. 

5.3 Safety Constraint Enforcement 

We evaluate our safety-policy extension on SafeAgentBench, covering hazardous instructions and long-horizon tasks with temporal constraints. Hazard policies are instantiated from benchmark la-bels, while long-horizon enforcement incorporates      

> 025 50 75 100 Local total Exact match Entity F1 Skill F1 Entity-ID validity Format validity
> ∆= + 27 .4∆= + 25 .1∆= + 54 .8∆= + 2 .3∆= + 98 .1∆= + 0 .0
> Score (0–100)
> Baseline CLAMP

Figure 2: Effect of C LAMP on grounding and inter-face metrics. Results use frozen InternVL3.5-8B on 474 VLABench prompts. Circles denote the baseline and diamonds denote C LAMP . Scores range from 0 to 100, with higher values indicating better performance; 

∆ denotes the score difference between C LAMP and the baseline. The largest gains occur in entity-ID validity and entity F1, while skill F1 changes little and format validity remains unchanged. 

action recovery through rewinding, retrying, and validation of policy-proposed alternatives. Table 2 reports semantic and symbolic evaluation results separately. On long-horizon tasks, policy enforce-ment with recovery reduces symbolic violations from 0.41 to 0.05 , while judged safety and comple-tion improve. Token-only decoding achieves higher completion but retains substantially more viola-tions. Hazardous tasks show similar reductions in symbolic violations, with smaller, split-dependent changes in semantic judgments. Overall, the results demonstrate improved compliance with encoded policies, with semantic safety evaluated separately. Appendix A3.8 provides additional implementation and evaluation details, including metric computa-tion, rule compilation, and policy recovery. 

5.4 Test-Time Adaptation 

Table 10 compares test-time HMM adaptation con-figurations on 480 VLABench prompts. Adding TTBA to TTDA increases the pooled overall score from 1.0 to 9.6 and the Physical Laws score from 

6.4 to 59 .0; adding OTTA to TTDA leaves both scores unchanged. The TTBA gain is confined to Physical Laws and accompanies a shift in the dom-inant predicted skill. Appendix A1.7 describes the updates, and Appendix A3.7 analyzes the matched contrasts and generated plans. Method Three-vote semantic judge Symbolic rule checker                                                              

> Reject Judged safe ↑Judged unsafe ↓Complete Plan valid ↑Rule viol. ↓
> (a) Hazardous instructions: Reject ↑; Complete ↓
> Concrete hazardous instructions — Unsafe-Detailed ( n=300 )
> Baseline 0.26 0.16 0.32 0.24 0.74 0.20 Safety policy 0.30 0.27 0.23 0.12 0.97 0.02
> Abstract hazardous instructions at four abstraction levels — Abstract ( n=100 )
> Baseline 0.29 0.16 0.19 0.14 0.77 0.18 Safety policy 0.33 0.19 0.20 0.10 0.95 0.04 (b) Legitimate instructions: Reject ↓; Complete ↑
> Tasks with an explicit temporal requirement — Long-horizon ( n=50 )
> Baseline 0.06 0.06 0.24 0.30 0.52 0.41 Token DFA 0.06 0.10 0.36 0.46 0.54 0.40 Policy + recovery 0.06 0.18 0.20 0.38 0.94 0.05
> Benign detailed controls — Safe-Detailed ( n=300 )
> Baseline 0.00 0.18 0.28 0.32 ––Token DFA 0.00 0.17 0.29 0.34 ––

Table 2: SafeAgentBench safety and task-completion results with Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct. The first four columns report three-vote majority semantic judgments. They and Plan valid are proportions over the indicated split size, whereas Rule viol. is a per-constraint violation rate. Plan valid denotes compliance with the post-hoc 

Drch safety checker. Bold marks the best value within each split, including ties; dashes indicate that the checker was not run. 

5.5 Discussion Computational cost. On the batched-vLLM path, syntax enforcement changes amortized run time from 3.9 to 4.0 s/prompt. Within the Hugging-Face path, adding TTBA to TTDA changes it from 

12 .9 to 31 .0 s/prompt (Table 13). These values di-vide complete-run wall time by the prompt count; the cross-path difference does not isolate HMM overhead. 

Failure modes. Remaining errors include task-type mismatch, incomplete or misaligned symbolic specifications, and HMM single-skill collapse (Ap-pendix A4.1). In the adaptation diagnostic, calibra-tion changes the dominant skill without restoring task-specific action selection. 

Takeaways. Scene-grounded constraints im-prove entity compliance, and HMM guidance pro-vides additional planning gains beyond hard con-straints. The token-level case study illustrates entity-ID enforcement and HMM-guided removal of a redundant final action (Figure 7). 

6 Conclusion 

We presented CLAMP, a multimodal constraint-grounding framework for VLM-based embodied planning. CLAMP combines scene-grounded hard constraints with HMM-based lookahead under a supplied symbolic action model, integrating syntax, visibility, and goal reachability into decoding over a frozen backbone. At test time, only the HMM emis-sion matrix is recalibrated using continuations sam-pled from the VLM. Experiments show improve-ments in object grounding and constraint compli-ance, with safety-policy enforcement and recovery reducing symbolic-rule violations. These findings support incorporating scene evidence and symbolic constraints directly into decoding to improve em-bodied planning without updating the VLM. 

Acknowledgments 

This project is partially supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) grant N00014-23-1-2417. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommen-dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Office of Naval Research. We thank the anony-mous reviewers for their thoughtful feedback and suggestions. We are grateful to Gwen Yidou-Weng, Haoyi Qiu, and Zihan Wang for early discussions that helped shape initial ideas behind this work. We also thank Danial Kamali, Tanawan Premsri, Josue Kpodo, Ellie Xia, and Baktash Ansari of the MSU HLR Lab for reviewing this work and providing constructive feedback. 

Limitations 

Scope and interface assumptions. CLAMP op-erates on VLM planners that expose discrete sym-bolic skill calls. Its guarantees are conditional on the supplied scene support, canonicalization, ac-tion schema, transition model, and goal predicates, and therefore do not directly extend to continuous-action VLA policies such as RT-2 (Zitkovich et al., 2023), OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2025), and π0 (Black et al., 2025). Extending C LAMP to these models would require an explicit constraint-checkable in-terface, such as discrete skills, tool calls, or quan-tized action tokens. Errors in perception or specifi-cation can consequently reject valid plans or admit unsafe ones. 

Calibration and perception limitations. The HMM prior depends on both its supervision and adaptation regime. In VLABench, the strongest vision HMM uses ground-truth skill/image pairs, whereas the base/text HMM and test-time updates rely on frozen-model continuations, so these set-tings are not supervision matched. Moreover, emission-only test-time adaptation is efficient but not uniformly beneficial: gains are concentrated in Physical Laws, and OTTA provides no measured improvement. Self-generated updates may also re-inforce incorrect modes. Similarly, conservative visibility gating prevents unsupported object ref-erences but may reject feasible plans under occlu-sion; the current system lacks observation memory, active viewpoint selection, and calibrated soft visi-bility. 

Independent constraint lookahead. Syntax, vis-ibility, and reachability are evaluated separately. The backward reachability computation enumer-ates actions permitted by the symbolic transition model without requiring future action arguments to belong to Eseen . It can therefore assign finite mass to a continuation that depends on an unobserved entity, even though the visibility mask will reject that reference when it is generated. The resulting lookahead can overestimate joint feasibility and lead to a later decoding failure. A jointly feasible lookahead would need to incorporate visibility into future action enumeration. 

Recovery and physical execution. The SafeAgentBench long-horizon configuration supplements one-pass decoding with backup-and-retry and validated forced-action injection. This recovery mechanism adds latency and may still fail when no valid alternative exists. More broadly, our evidence is limited to simulators and offline benchmark harnesses. Deployment under partial observability, stochastic dynamics, or continuous physical control would require closed-loop replan-ning, stronger perception, and motion-level safety mechanisms beyond the symbolic constraints studied here. 

Ethical Considerations 

CLAMP reduces invalid symbolic plans but does not establish physical safety: it can confidently en-force an incorrect action schema, affordance table, or transition model. Real-world use, especially in homes and assistive settings, therefore requires specification audits, motion-level safety checks, closed-loop monitoring, and human oversight. 

Broader Impacts 

Explicit syntax, grounding, and world-state con-straints can make embodied planning easier to au-dit, but may create false confidence if constraint satisfaction is mistaken for task or physical safety or a flawed domain model narrows the permitted actions. Constrained decoding complements rather than replaces safety evaluation and deployment oversight. 

References       

> Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Haus-man, et al. 2022. Do As I Can, Not As I Say: Ground-ing Language in Robotic Affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, et al. 2025. Qwen3-VL technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.21631. Leonard E. Baum, Ted Petrie, George Soules, and Nor-man Weiss. 1970. A Maximization Technique Oc-curring in the Statistical Analysis of Probabilistic Functions of Markov Chains. The Annals of Mathe-matical Statistics , 41(1):164 – 171. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szy-mon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, et al. 2025.
> π0: A vision-language-action flow model for gen-eral robot control. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) .Yixin Dong, Charlie F. Ruan, Yaxing Cai, Ruihang Lai, Ziyi Xu, Yilong Zhao, and Tianqi Chen. 2025. XGrammar: Flexible and efficient structured gen-eration engine for large language models. In Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys) ,volume 7.

Alexandre Duret-Lutz, Etienne Renault, Maximilien Colange, Florian Renkin, Alexandre Gbaguidi Aisse, Philipp Schlehuber-Caissier, Thomas Medioni, An-toine Martin, Jérôme Dubois, Clément Gillard, and Henrich Lauko. 2022. From Spot 2.0 to Spot 2.10: What’s new? In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-tional Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV’22) , volume 13372 of Lecture Notes in Com-puter Science , pages 174–187. Springer. Guhao Feng, Shengjie Luo, Kai Hua, Ge Zhang, Wen-hao Huang, Di He, and Tianle Cai. 2026. In-place test-time training. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. 2021. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of control, robotics, and autonomous systems , 4(1):265–293. Saibo Geng, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. 2023. Grammar-constrained decoding for structured NLP tasks without finetuning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10932– 10952, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Danial Kamali and Parisa Kordjamshidi. 2026. NeP-Tune: A neuro-pythonic framework for tunable com-positional reasoning on vision-language. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2026, pages 86124–86148. Danial Kamali, Tanawan Premsri, Shreya Rajpal, Amir Zadeh, Chuan Li, and Parisa Kordjamshidi. 2026. SATURN: Symbolic spatial reasoning for multi-perspective grounding. Preprint , arXiv:2606.22694. Parv Kapoor, Akila Ganlath, Michael Clifford, Changliu Liu, Sebastian Scherer, and Eunsuk Kang. 2025. Constrained decoding for safe robot navigation foun-dation models. Preprint , arXiv:2509.01728. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. 2025. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model. In Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 270 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2679–2713. PMLR. Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gok-men, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martín-Martín, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. 2023. Behavior-1k: A benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and re-alistic simulation. In Conference on Robot Learning ,pages 80–93. PMLR. Manling Li, Shiyu Zhao, Qineng Wang, Kangrui Wang, Yu Zhou, Sanjana Srivastava, Cem Gokmen, Tony Lee, Li E Li, Ruohan Zhang, et al. 2024. Embodied agent interface: Benchmarking llms for embodied decision making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:100428–100534. Yifan Li, Lichi Li, Anh Dao, Xinyu Zhou, Wenjun Huang, Tianyi Ma, Yicheng Qiao, Zheda Mai, Daeun Lee, Zichen Chen, Pan Wang, Lehan Yang, Tianlong Wang, Zhen Tan, Sheng Li, Mohit Bansal, Yang Ni, and Yu Kong. 2025. Industrynav: Exploring spatial reasoning of embodied agents in dynamic industrial navigation. arXiv preprint .Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. 2023. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 9493–9500. IEEE. Jian Liang, Ran He, and Tieniu Tan. 2024. A compre-hensive survey on test-time adaptation under distribu-tion shifts. International Journal of Computer Vision ,133:31–64. Xiaoya Lu, Zeren Chen, Xuhao Hu, Yijin Zhou, We-ichen Zhang, Dongrui Liu, Lu Sheng, and Jing Shao. 2026. IS-Bench: Evaluating interactive safety of VLM-driven embodied agents in daily household tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Ar-tificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 35680–35688. Tianyi Ma, Yue Zhang, Zehao Wang, and Parisa Ko-rdjamshidi. 2026. Breaking down and building up: Mixture of skill-based vision-and-language naviga-tion agents. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 13035–13065, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gabriel Poesia, Alex Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and Sumit Gul-wani. 2022. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models. In The Tenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . Open-Review.net. Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. 2018. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Shreya Rajpal, Michal Golovanevsky, and Carsten Eick-hoff. 2026. Less is more: Label-guided summariza-tion of procedural and instructional videos. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.12243. Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2021. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Shubham Ugare, Tarun Suresh, Hangoo Kang, Sasa Misailovic, and Gagandeep Singh. 2025. SynCode: LLM generation with grammar augmentation. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Shu Wang, Muzhi Han, Ziyuan Jiao, Zeyu Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Hangxin Liu. 2024. Llm^ 3: Large language model-based task and motion planning with motion failure reasoning. In 

2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 12086–12092. IEEE. Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, et al. 2025. Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in ver-satility, reasoning, and efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 .Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. 2023. Effi-cient guided generation for large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2307.09702. Zhenyu Wu, Ziwei Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Jiwen Lu, and Haibin Yan. 2023. Embodied task planning with large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2307.01848. Muyang Yan, Miras Mengdibayev, Ardon Floros, Wei-hang Guo, Lydia E. Kavraki, and Zachary Kingston. 2026. Using VLM reasoning to constrain task and motion planning. Preprint , arXiv:2510.25548. Zhutian Yang, Caelan Garrett, Dieter Fox, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. 2025. Guiding long-horizon task and motion planning with vision language models. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 16847–16853. Ziyi Yang, Shreyas Sundara Raman, Ankit Shah, and Stefanie Tellex. 2024. Plug in the safety chip: En-forcing constraints for LLM-driven robot agents. In 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-tomation (ICRA) , pages 14435–14442. IEEE. Sheng Yin, Xianghe Pang, Yuanzhuo Ding, Menglan Chen, Yutong Bi, Yichen Xiong, Wenhao Huang, Zhen Xiang, Jing Shao, and Siheng Chen. 2024. SafeAgentBench: A benchmark for safe task planning of embodied LLM agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.13178. Honghua Zhang, Po-Nien Kung, Masahiro Yoshida, Guy Van den Broeck, and Nanyun Peng. 2024a. Adaptable logical control for large language mod-els. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 115563–115587. Curran Associates, Inc. Lingfeng Zhang, Yuening Wang, Hongjian Gu, Atia Hamidizadeh, Zhanguang Zhang, Yuecheng Liu, Yu-tong Wang, David Gamaliel Arcos Bravo, Junyi Dong, Shunbo Zhou, et al. 2024b. Et-plan-bench: Embodied task-level planning benchmark towards spatial-temporal cognition with foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14682 .Shiduo Zhang, Zhe Xu, Peiju Liu, Xiaopeng Yu, Yuan Li, Qinghui Gao, Zhaoye Fei, Zhangyue Yin, Zux-uan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2025. VLABench: A large-scale benchmark for language-conditioned robotics manipulation with long-horizon reasoning tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 11142–11152. Weijie Zhou, Manli Tao, Chaoyang Zhao, Haiyun Guo, Honghui Dong, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. 2025. PhysVLM: Enabling visual language models to un-derstand robotic physical reachability. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6940– 6949. Zihao Zhu, Bingzhe Wu, Zhengyou Zhang, Lei Han, Qingshan Liu, and Baoyuan Wu. 2024. EARBench: Towards evaluating physical risk awareness for task planning of foundation model-based embodied AI agents. Preprint , arXiv:2408.04449. Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Van-houcke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut, Anikait Singh, Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Sermanet, Pannag R. Sanketi, Grecia Salazar, et al. 2023. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic con-trol. In Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2165–2183. PMLR. A1 Methodological and Implementation Details 

This section follows the decoding data flow from HMM token dynamics and action-level reachabil-ity to logit composition and the complete decod-ing loop. It then specifies the HMM variants and test-time adaptation used by the evaluated configu-rations. 

A1.1 HMM forward and backward operators 

The HMM has parameters ϕ = ( μ, A, B ): ini-tial distribution μ ∈ ∆H−1, transition matrix 

A ∈ RH×H , and emission matrix B ∈ RH×| V |,with hidden states hn ∈ H = {1, . . . , H }. It is distilled once from continuations of the base VLM under the same tokenizer following Zhang et al. (2024a) and is used at decode time as a scoring oracle, not a generator. Here A and B

denote row-stochastic probability matrices, even when their implementation stores log probabili-ties. The forward operator maintains the joint log-probability ρn[h] = log Pϕ(y1: n, h n = h), initial-ized by ρ0[h] = log μ[h]:

ρn[h] = LSE h′∈H 

ρn−1[h′] + log A(h′, h )

+ log B(h, y n).

(2) The corresponding backward operator computes a suffix log-likelihood for a candidate continuation without another VLM forward pass. 

Action-segment likelihood. Let w : Aγ → V ∗

map each executable action to its token represen-tation. For a ∈ A γ , the HMM segment operator is 

Fa[h, h ′] = log Pϕ

 w(a), h n+|w(a)| = h′

| hn = h. (3) 

Fa marginalizes over intermediate HMM states and can be precomputed as an |A γ |× H ×H tensor for the current emission matrix B.

A1.2 Backward dynamic program for action-level reachability Token-to-action example. For illustration, sup-pose a = pick(cup) is executable from zt, with 

∆( zt, a ) = z′, and its serialization consists of four tokens: pick , (, cup , and ). While the first three tokens are generated, the reachability state remains 

zt. The state-conditioned mask retains a candidate token only if the extended prefix can still be com-pleted into an action executable from zt. Once the closing token completes the action under τγ , the transition is committed and the state becomes z′.Thus, the token sequence w(a) realizes a single action-level transition. 

Backward recursion. For reachability state z ∈Z, HMM state h ∈ H, and remaining action budget K, let R[K, z, h ] be the HMM-weighted log-probability mass of executable continuations that reach a goal state in Frch within at most K

additional actions. The boundary conditions are 

R[K, z, h ] = 0 for z ∈ Frch and R[0 , z, h ] = −∞ 

for z / ∈ Frch . For K > 0 and z / ∈ Frch ,

R[K, z, h ] = LSE a∈A rch (z)

> h′∈H

h

Fa[h, h ′]+ RK − 1, ∆( z, a ), h ′i

.

(4) Here Arch (z) = {a ∈ A γ : ∆( z, a ) is defined }.The transition structure can be cached, but Fa and the numeric table R must be refreshed after an update to B. The table occupies O(Kmax |Z| H)

memory. While constructing action at, let bt be the to-ken index immediately before its parser-identified action span and let Arch ,n (v; zt) contain the exe-cutable actions compatible with candidate token v.The candidate’s future-reachability score is 

Grch ,n (v) = LSE a∈A rch ,n (v;zt)

> h,h ′∈H

h

ρbt [h]+ Fa[h, h ′] + R[Kmax − t − 1, ∆( zt, a ), h ′]

i

− LSE h∈H ρbt [h],

(5) with Grch ,n (v) = −∞ when the compatible action set is empty. The final term removes the observed-prefix log-likelihood, so action scores use a nor-malized starting belief. This expression assumes positive HMM probability for the observed prefix. This is the action-to-token projection used by the reachability term in Equation (1). 

A1.3 Logit composition: components and gating 

At step n, Equation (1) combines the following quantities: • ℓn(v): the frozen VLM next-token log-probability for candidate token v;• log msyn ,n (v) and log mvis ,n (v): the prefix-local syntax and visibility masks; • log mrch ,n (v): the state-conditioned executabil-ity mask; • Grch ,n (v): the budget-aware reachability score in Equation (5), weighted by λ ≥ 0.The three binary masks determine local admissi-bility, with log masks in {0, −∞} . For λ > 0,

Grch ,n = −∞ also excludes candidates with-out HMM-supported goal-reaching continuations within budget; finite scores rank the remaining can-didates. For λ = 0 , the guidance term is omitted. Neither case alters the transition relation ∆ or the action horizon Kmax .

Failure gate. If no admissible continuation has a finite modified logit, decoding returns F AIL . Ter-mination is checked separately from action com-pletion: a plan terminator is admissible only at a complete-action boundary with accepting syntax and a reachability state in Frch . Budget exhaustion outside that set also returns F AIL .

A1.4 Pseudocode for the per-token fused logit pipeline 

Algorithm 1 instantiates the constrained-decoding procedure in Section 4.2. Between iterations it maintains the syntax and visibility DFA states, the reachability state zt, the HMM forward belief, the current-action token prefix, and the remaining ac-tion budget. 

Optional per-instance adaptation. With TTBA enabled (Appendix A1.7), adapt the emission ma-trix from a batch of prompt-specific unconstrained continuations before entering the decoding loop. Initialize HMM-dependent computations from the adapted matrix and hold it fixed during plan gen-eration. When action-level reachability is enabled, this includes rebuilding the Fa operators and nu-meric R table; the symbolic masks and transition relation remain unchanged. 

Implementation notes. When the grammar per-mits alternative spacing or punctuation, the com-patible action set is tracked through the parser’s action-name and argument positions rather than by matching the raw output substring to a single canonical spelling. Formatting tokens advance the grammar and parser and narrow the action set only when they resolve an action or argument bound-ary. Wrappers, inter-action separators, and schema-permitted reasoning outside action spans are han-dled by the grammar without triggering action-level transitions.                  

> Surface string Llama-3 ID Qwen3-VL ID max hLℓ[h, j ]
> "pick" 30345 29245 +14 .62 (high)
> "␣pick" 3820 3735 +1 .84
> "place" 2050 2007 −1.09
> "skill_sequence" 30554 multi −1.21

Table 3: Llama-3 → Qwen3 token-id mismatch on the BEHAVIOR-trained HMM. In the quoted surface string, ␣ denotes exactly one leading ASCII space. Here 

Lℓ ∈ RH×| Vℓ| is the archived raw emission-logit tensor: rows index hidden state h, columns index Llama token 

j, and the reported value is the column maximum in natural-logit units before row-wise log-softmax. It is a diagnostic score, not a probability. Because Qwen3 emits a different ID for the same surface string, the high source column is not addressed by the Qwen3 decoder without remapping. 

The syntax and visibility masks are sparse tran-sition lookups. Reachability enumeration is re-stricted to actions compatible with the current token prefix, and each surviving action uses one H × H

segment operator and one backward-table lookup. This keeps the token-level and action-level struc-tures separate rather than constructing their product automaton. 

A1.5 Llama → Qwen3 emission remap Why the remap is necessary. The emission matrix B ∈ RH×| Vℓ| of an HMM trained un-der the Llama-3 tokenizer cannot be applied un-changed under the Qwen3-VL tokenizer: the two assign different token IDs to the same surface strings. Applying an unmapped checkpoint pro-duces empty {"skill_sequence":[]} outputs in 

480 /480 Mode B prompts because the resulting HMM guidance steers the decoder toward the wrong Qwen3 token IDs. Table 3 gives four representative entries illustrating the failure: the archived HMM places its largest raw emission logit among these examples at the Llama token id for 

"pick" (+14 .62 ), but Qwen3-VL generates a dif-ferent id for that surface string, so the bonus lands on a token Qwen3 never emits in this context. 

Remap algorithm. The remap is target-driven. For every Qwen3 target ID q ∈ Vq (|Vq|=151 ,936 ), we decode its Qwen3 surface string and retokenise that string with the Llama-3 tokenizer, obtaining a source-ID sequence J(q). For hidden state h, the Algorithm 1 CLAMP -standard per-token constrained decoding 

Require: instruction ℓ; initial observation o0; action schema γ; frozen VLM; token DFAs Dsyn and Dvis ; reachability DFA 

Drch = ( Z, Aγ , ∆, z 0, F rch ); HMM ϕ = ( μ, A, B ); table R; parser τγ ; serialization w : Aγ → V ∗; horizon Kmax ;weight λ

Ensure: FAIL , or a token sequence y1: N parsed as an action plan 1: initialize qsyn ,1, qvis ,1, z0, t ← 0, and ρ0[h] ← log μ[h]

2: for n = 1 , 2, . . . do 

3: if t = Kmax and zt /∈ Frch then 

4: return FAIL 

5: end if 

6: ℓn ← VLM FORWARD (ℓ, o 0, γ, y <n )

7: for v ∈ V do 

8: compute msyn ,n (v) and mvis ,n (v) from their prospective DFA states 9: initialize mrch ,n (v) ← 1, Grch ,n (v) ← 0

10: if v terminates the plan then 

11: admit v only at a complete-action boundary with accepting syntax and zt ∈ Frch 

12: else if v starts or continues an action span then 

13: if t = Kmax then 

14: set mrch ,n (v) ← 0

15: else 

16: construct Arch ,n (v; zt) using parser compatibility and ∆

17: set mrch ,n (v) ← ⊮[Arch ,n (v; zt)̸ = ∅]

18: if λ > 0 then 

19: compute Grch ,n (v) using Equation (5) 20: end if 

21: end if 

22: end if 

23: eℓn(v) ← ℓn(v) + log msyn ,n (v) + log mvis ,n (v) + log mrch ,n (v) + λG rch ,n (v)

24: end for 

25: if eℓn(v) = −∞ for every v ∈ V then 

26: return FAIL 

27: end if 

28: sample yn ∼ softmax( eℓn)

29: advance the syntax and visibility DFA states with yn

30: update ρn using Equation (2) 31: if yn completes the serialization of action at under τγ then 

32: zt+1 ← ∆( zt, a t); t ← t + 1 

33: end if 

34: if yn completes the plan then 

35: if syntax accepts and zt ∈ Frch then 

36: return y1: n

37: else 

38: return FAIL 

39: end if 

40: end if 

41: end for 

unnormalised target emission is 

eBq(h, q ) = exp 

 1

|J(q)|

X

> j∈J(q)

log Bℓ(h, j )

 .

(6) A singleton J(q) therefore copies one source col-umn; a multi-ID sequence uses the geometric mean in probability space. If two Qwen3 IDs produce the same J(q), each target ID receives the same projected value: collisions are not summed. An unusable J(q) receives unnormalised mass 10 −9.Finally, each hidden-state row is normalised over all q ∈ Vq; only the resulting Bq(h, ·) is a probabil-ity distribution. This direction and normalisation make the 151 ,936 -ID coverage categories in Fig-ure 3 well defined. Figure 3 reports both coverage and structural diagnostics. Single- and multi-subtoken projec-tions account for 72 .3% and 27 .5% , respectively, and only 267 IDs use the smoothing fallback. The mean row-entropy ratio is 1.020 , while canonical-skill emission mass remains within 0.846 –1.058 of the source. We use this remapped checkpoint for all Mode B / TaPA experiments; TTBA and OTTA updates then operate in Qwen3 token space. 

Practical consequence. Without this remap, ev-ery reported Mode B number reduces to the empty-sequence floor. With the remap, the source HMM (R0) recovers non-trivial behaviour and TTA is applied on top (Appendix A3.7). The remap is 0 25 50 75 100 No usable J(q): 267 (0.18%) unnormalised mass 10 −9         

> |J(q)|>1
> 41,753 (27.5%)
> |J(q)|= 1
> 109,916 (72.3%)
> Share of Qwen3 vocabulary (%)
> (a) Remap coverage
> 0.80.911.1
> Canonical-skill mass Row entropy
> 0.846 –1.058 1.020 (+2 .0% )
> Qwen3 / Llama ratio
> (b) Structural-preservation diagnostics

Figure 3: Target-driven Llama-3 → Qwen3 emission remap. For each Qwen3 ID q, its decoded surface string is retokenised by Llama-3 to obtain J(q) (Eq. 6). (a) Source-sequence length across all 151 ,936 target IDs before row normalisation. Duplicate J(q) values are copied to each target ID rather than summed; unusable encodings receive unnormalised mass 10 −9. (b) The remapped/source mean row-entropy ratio and canonical-skill emission-mass ratios after row normalisation; the dotted line marks parity. 

therefore a prerequisite, not an ablation knob. 

A1.6 Vision-conditioned HMM 

The vision-conditioned HMM augments the source emission B with a per-prompt vision context c ex-tracted from the VLM’s image-level encoder out-put (last layer, mean-pooled across patches). At distillation, we condition each ground-truth contin-uation on its matching context vector and learn a row-normalized context-modulated emission: 

B(h, v | c) = B(h, v ) exp(( W c )v)

P 

> u∈V

B(h, u ) exp(( W c )u) . (7) Here W ∈ R|V |× dc is a rank-64 projection. The normalization is over vocabulary tokens for each hidden state h, so P 

> v∈V

B(h, v | c) = 1 . At de-code time, c is computed once per prompt from the prompt’s image and held fixed for the whole sequence. The training objective is the same per-token NLL as the unimodal HMM distilla-tion (Zhang et al., 2024a) plus a Frobenius regu-lariser λW ∥W ∥2 

> F

to prevent vision drift on prompts with weak image cues. On VLABench (Table 1), the supervised vision-conditioned HMM with per-instance calibration reaches a Macro score of 38 .7,compared with 37 .1 for the text HMM. This 1.6-point difference combines the changes in HMM supervision and calibration. 

A1.7 Test-time adaptation: derivation, equations, and stability Next-token form of the HMM loss. Test-time adaptation addresses changes in the HMM’s token distribution across domains, sessions, or plans. Its self-supervised objective is 

LTTA (ϕ; y1: N ) = − 

> N−1

X

> n=0

log Pϕ(yn+1 | y1: n) ,

(8) which requires no external label because the test se-quence supplies its own next-token targets through the chain rule. Let fn(h; ϕ) = log Pϕ(y1: n, h n =

h) be the log-domain joint forward variable; the one-step probability under the HMM is 

Pϕ

 yn+1 | y1: n

 =

P 

> h,h ′

exp( fn(h)) A(h, h ′) B(h′, y n+1 )

P 

> h

exp( fn(h)) , (9) which makes Eq. (8) a self-supervised objective on any test-sequence prefix. Following Feng et al. (2026) we update only B and freeze (A, μ ).Throughout, we write Φ( B) = ( μsrc , A src , B ) for the HMM with adapted emission B and frozen source parameters (μsrc , A src ). The source check-point is BEHAVIOR-trained for the VLABench TTA factorial and VirtualHome-trained for the sep-arate VH-to-BEHAVIOR calibration study. 

Tier 1 (TTDA, offline domain adaptation). Run once before deployment on M unconstrained con-tinuations {y(i)}Mi=1 sampled from the base VLM in the target domain: 

Bdom = arg min 

> B

h 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

LTTA 

 Φ( B); y(i)

+ λTTDA ∥B − Bsrc ∥2

> F

i

.

(10) with B restricted to row-stochastic emission ma-trices. The Frobenius term anchors a gradient-based update to the source matrix. An emission-only Baum–Welch update instead estimates normal-ized expected emission counts for the sequence-likelihood objective; anchoring that estimate by interpolation is a separate operation and does not solve the penalized objective above. 

Tier 2 (OTTA, online session adaptation). Af-ter prompt t, let eBdom ,t denote the updated, row-normalized emission estimate from its token se-quence, initialized from Bdom ,t −1, with Bdom ,0 =

Bdom . The anchored update is 

Bdom ,t = (1 − λO)Bdom 

+ λO eBdom ,t . (11) For 0 ≤ λO ≤ 1, this arithmetic mixture preserves row normalization. A log-space implementation applies logaddexp to the weighted log probabili-ties log Bdom and log eBdom ,t , not to the probability matrices themselves. Each update retains a fixed contribution from the domain anchor. 

Tier 3 (TTBA, per-instance batch adaptation). 

Before generating the plan for prompt t, draw 

Minst = 5 unconstrained continuations from the frozen VLM. Let Bpre ,t be the emission matrix available before this prompt: the source matrix, the TTDA-adapted matrix, or the current session ma-trix, depending on the enabled tiers. One emission-only Baum–Welch iteration on the sampled contin-uations produces a row-normalized estimate eBinst ,t .The anchored instance matrix is 

Binst ,t = (1 − λB)Bpre ,t 

+ λB eBinst ,t , 0 ≤ λB ≤ 1. (12) Initialize the decoder with this matrix, keep it fixed throughout the plan, and discard the instance-specific changes afterwards. Session-level OTTA, when enabled, updates separately from the com-pleted plan. Thus R2 and R3 evaluate pre-generation batch adaptation, with no within-plan chunk updates. 

Decode-time cost. TTDA runs offline. For mea-sured per-instance TTBA, let L be the total num-ber of tokens in the five sampled continuations and H the number of hidden states. With dense transitions, one emission-only Baum–Welch pass costs O(LH 2 + H|V |), including emission-count initialization and normalization. Its online cost also includes five VLM sampling calls and decoder reinitialization. Any HMM-dependent lookahead tables must be rebuilt; when action-level reacha-bility is enabled, this includes Fa and R. OTTA instead adds one emission update after the gen-erated plan, costing O(N H 2 + H|V |) for a plan of N tokens, plus refresh of any cached HMM-dependent quantities before subsequent decoding. These costs exclude the base VLM’s constrained generation and depend on sample and plan lengths. Appendix A3.11 reports the measured run-time dif-ferences and a sampling/update profile. 

Adaptation objective and safeguards. The ob-jective and update rules have the following prop-erties. (i) LTTA is a sequence NLL; dividing by the number of tokens gives per-token NLL. Im-proving the adaptation-sequence objective does not guarantee lower held-out NLL or better planning scores. (ii) The arithmetic mixture in Eq. (11) pre-serves a fixed contribution from the normalized anchor distribution. (iii) Discarding the Tier 3 in-stance matrix prevents its changes from carrying into the next prompt; session-level OTTA updates, when enabled, are maintained separately and re-set at task-family boundaries. (iv) The feasibility structure—the syntax and visibility DFAs, Drch ,and the action budget K—is symbolic and never depends on B. The reachability table R also de-pends on the HMM’s support: a symbolically exe-cutable path has finite mass only if its serialization has positive HMM probability. An adaptation step that preserves this support changes finite scores without adding or removing supported paths. The numeric table must be refreshed after B changes, while the symbolic masks and transition relation remain fixed. 

A2 Experimental Protocol and Reproducibility 

This section consolidates the benchmark scope, evaluation tracks, hyperparameters, simulator as-sumptions, metrics, and baseline implementations used throughout the experiments. 

A2.1 Benchmarks for Executable and Safe Embodied Planning 

The Embodied Agent Interface (EAI) (Li et al., 2024) and VirtualHome (Puig et al., 2018) test whether agents produce executable action se-quences for household tasks, while BEHAVIOR examines longer-horizon plans in richer simulated settings. VLABench (Zhang et al., 2025) adds a visual grounding requirement, where plans must be consistent with observed scene geometry rather than abstract object names. SafeAgentBench (Yin et al., 2024) shows that task completion and safety can come apart: agents frequently finish a goal task by taking actions that violate stated constraints. Ac-cordingly, we report task success separately from plan validity, grounding, executability, and safety. 

A2.2 Setup details 

This section expands on the abbreviated setup of Section 5. 

Models and serving. Text-only experiments use Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024); multimodal experiments use Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025), and the second-backbone validation uses InternVL3.5-8B. Qwen3-VL is served via vLLM with thinking mode disabled ( enable_thinking=False ) to prevent 

<think> tokens from corrupting JSON / LTL pars-ing. The main ablations always compare con-strained and unconstrained decoding on the same backbone. No planner component is fine-tuned. We use greedy decoding ( T =0 ) throughout, except per-instance TTA which draws M =5 stochastic continuations. 

Evaluation-track dictionary. Table 4 records the pipeline boundaries used throughout the fig-ures and tables. All VLABench scores are reported on a 0–100 scale, but the score definitions and ag-gregation rules are track-specific. The Qwen VL-main block macro-averages six reported dimension scores, whereas the diagnostic tracks pool local component scores over prompts. Values from dif-ferent rows of the dictionary are not direct compar-isons even when the backbone and prompt count coincide. 

HMM bridge. The base conditional HMM (H=128 ) is self-distilled from continuations sam-pled from the same frozen backbone, following Zhang et al. (2024a). The vision-conditioned VLABench HMM is the exception: it is trained from benchmark ground-truth skill sequences paired with their images and therefore uses addi-tional task supervision. The Qwen3-vocabulary HMM used for VLABench Mode B and TaPA is obtained by remapping the Llama-tokenised checkpoint (Appendix A1.5); without the remap, every Mode B / TaPA output collapses to the empty-sequence floor. Appendix A1.1 defines the HMM forward/backward operators, and Ap-pendix A1.2 defines the backward DP table R used by Drch . The vision-conditioned variant appears in Appendix A1.6; Appendix A1.7 gives the per-instance TTA derivations and stability analysis. 

External-baseline harness. Safety Chip (Yang et al., 2024) translates an NL constraint to LTL, monitors the completed plan with a Spot DFA, and reprompts the LLM on violation (up to three times). LLM-TAMP-prompt (Wang et al., 2024) adds a CoT-then-JSON output instruction and one parse-failure retry; on EAI it reduces to a structured CoT baseline because no motion-feasibility checker is available. Mechanism comparison and run scripts are in Appendix A2.6. These external rows are distinct from the matched C TRL -G/S AFE DEC di-agnostic, whose adaptations are described in Ap-pendix A3.1. 

A2.3 Hyperparameters 

Table 5 consolidates the decoding, HMM, and adap-tation settings used throughout Section 5. Grid sweep ranges are λdiag ∈ {10 −3, 5 ·

10 −3, 10 −2, 5·10 −2, 10 −1, 3·10 −1, 1} (BEHAVIOR / VLABench Mode A). The implementation histor-ically calls this coefficient gamma_scale ; it is a finite soft-score weight and is unrelated to the hard validity masks log mi,n (v) ∈ { 0, −∞} . The mea-sured VLABench TTA factorial uses diagnostic weight λdiag = 1 , lookahead cap 50 , and a final-plan token cap of 256 . TTBA draws Minst = 5 

unconstrained continuations per prompt and per-forms one Baum–Welch emission update before decoding. OTTA performs one emission update after each completed plan. 

A2.4 Simulator assumptions and reported constraint use 

Drch ’s reachability assessment assumes that its symbolic transition model is sound and determinis-tic. A simulator may satisfy that assumption with-out a paper experiment actually evaluating the com-plete Drch mechanism. Table 6 therefore separates the benchmark environment from the constraint mechanism reported in this paper. 

A2.5 VLABench score definitions and aggregation Published benchmark metric. VLABench de-fines four components (Zhang et al., 2025): skill recall (SR), parameter recall (PR), skill–parameter recall (SPR), and precise matching (PM). The recall metrics use ground-truth skills, parameters, or skill– parameter pairs as their denominators. PM is the Experiment Model and evaluation set Compared configurations Score aggregation 

Main evaluation Qwen3-VL-8B Multimodal input 

480 prompts; six dimensions Baseline; syntax–visibility DFA; text HMM; supervised vision HMM Reported VL-main dimension scores; six-dimension macro mean (Table 1) Text-only diagnostics Llama-3.1-8B Text-only input 

480 prompts; six dimensions Baseline; DFA; HMM diagnostic-weight sweep Pooled mean of skill, entity, and exact match (Figure 6) Multimodal diagnostics Qwen3-VL-8B Multimodal input 

480 prompts; six dimensions Baseline; DFA Pooled mean of skill, entity, and exact match (Table 9 and fig. 6) Test-time adaptation Qwen3-VL-8B Multimodal input 

480 prompts ( 78 Physical Laws; 402 other) Remapped source HMM; TTDA; OTTA; TTBA Hugging Face generation Pooled mean of skill, entity, and exact match (Table 10) InternVL comparison InternVL3.5-8B Two-image input 

474 prompts; four dimensions Matched baseline and C LAMP Four-dimension local total; no six-dimension mean (Figure 2) 

Table 4: VLABench experimental settings and score aggregation. All scores are reported on a 0–100 scale. 

Parameter Default value Description 

λdiag 0.1 (Action Sequencing) 0.05 (Goal Interpretation) Finite soft-score weight in the transfer diagnostics. 

λ 1.0 Reachability-score weight in C LAMP -world/full. 

lookahead_cap 100 Maximum action-graph depth for diagnostic backward search. 

max_new_tokens 768–2048 Generated-token cap, fixed per benchmark family. 

Kmax 40 Maximum action budget for BEHAVIOR and VLABench. 

H 128 Number of HMM hidden states. 

Table 5: Decoder and HMM hyperparameters used in the experiments. The diagnostic weight λdiag corresponds to the gamma_scale implementation parameter. 

fraction of ground-truth dependency-graph nodes matched in skill, parameters, and dependency re-lations; it is not a binary whole-plan exact-match indicator. For component values in [0 , 1] , the pub-lished weighted score is 

Sofficial = 100  w1 SR + w2 PR + w3 SPR + w4 PM , (13) where wj ≥ 0 and P4 

> j=1

wj = 1 . The published-reference block in Table 1 reproduces the bench-mark’s reported results. 

Local diagnostic scores. VL-A, VL-B, and VL-TTA use the equal-weight local diagnostic 100( s +

e + x)/3, where the three means are the recorded skill-match, entity-match, and exact-match com-ponents over the evaluated prompts. This diag-nostic is distinct from the official four-component score. Component breakdowns are given in Fig-ure 6 and table 9. For InternVL, the per-example local total is specifically 100( F1,skill + F1,entity +EM) /3, where EM indicates exact skill-and-entity sequence match. Table 1 averages these per-example totals within each of its four evaluated dimensions; Figure 2 pools all 474 prompts. 

Qwen VL-main aggregation. The Qwen block in Table 1 reports six dimension scores and their unweighted arithmetic mean (Macro). Its base-line and constrained rows are compared within this block. The VL-main baseline of 28 .7 and the sepa-rate VL-B diagnostic baseline of 20 .1 come from different evaluation pipelines; the difference cannot be attributed to macro versus pooled aggregation alone. 

A2.6 External baseline implementations Backbone and comparison boundary. 

Safety Chip and LLM-TAMP-prompt use 

Qwen/Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct through the con-Table 6: Benchmark simulator assumptions and the mechanism actually reported. Simulator determinism alone does not imply that full Drch reachability was evaluated.                 

> Benchmark Simulator assumption Reported use in this paper
> EAI VirtualHome evolving_graph symbolic transitions Token grammar and text-only world-state reachability diagnostics; symbolic feasibility remains conditional on transition-model soundness. EAI BEHAVIOR iGibson /OmniGibson rigid-body physics; fixed-seed evaluations GI/SD output-schema and soft-score diagnostics. No complete Drch reachability result is reported. VLABench MuJoCo + dm-control; fixed benchmark episodes Syntax–visibility DFA and HMM diagnostics at the symbolic plan interface; no physical-execution guaran-tee is claimed. TaPA-60 AI2-THOR scene metadata and task splits Verb-format and visibility-DFA grounding diagnostic; no full Drch reachability evaluation. SafeAgentBench AI2-THOR task descriptions and sym-bolic safety rules Compiled temporal safety policy plus post-hoc rule checking and recovery; completion and safety are re-ported separately.

textual external-baseline harness. Thinking mode is disabled ( enable_thinking=False ) and decod-ing is greedy ( T =0 ). The C LAMP -token/world values discussed alongside them come from the matched Llama-3.1-8B track, not from that Qwen harness; their Task SR values are therefore not horizontal comparisons. 

A2.6.1 Safety Chip 

Safety Chip (Yang et al., 2024) enforces constraints through a reprompt loop that operates entirely out-side the decoder. (1) The LLM generates a com-plete plan in one shot. (2) A rule-based parser checks whether each action violates a constraint (format, vocabulary, argument arity). (3) On any violation, an NL description of the failure is ap-pended to the prompt and the LLM is queried again. (4) Steps (2)–(3) repeat up to three times; if no valid plan is produced, the last output is kept. The original system uses NL →LTL translation and a Spot DFA monitor (Duret-Lutz et al., 2022) to check temporal safety properties. EAI tasks carry no explicit NL safety constraint, so we in-stantiate Safety Chip with the action-format con-straint : a plan is valid iff every action name belongs to the allowed vocabulary with the correct argu-ment count. This is the same token-level condition that C LAMP -token enforces; the difference is that Safety Chip applies it post-hoc through reprompt-ing while C LAMP -token enforces it by masking invalid tokens to −∞ before sampling. Empirically, ≈15% of BEHAVIOR AS tasks ex-haust all three reprompts without converging to a valid format; those outputs are passed to the evalua-tor as-is and score 0 on grammar metrics. C LAMP -token achieves 0% grammar errors by construction on the same tasks. 

A2.6.2 LLM-TAMP-prompt 

LLM 3-TAMP (Wang et al., 2024) is a planner that pairs a CoT-then-JSON LLM with a motion-feasibility checker (PyBullet collision + IK) that feeds categorised failure messages back to the LLM for iterative repair. On EAI, which provides no sim-ulator, we run only the LLM component and call the result LLM-TAMP-prompt to distinguish it from the full system. 

What changes. Each EAI prompt is augmented with a CoT output instruction:     

> Before giving your final answer, briefly rea-son about the task (1–3 sentences). Then out-put a JSON object: {"reasoning": "...", "actions": <action sequence>} . Output only the JSON object; no other text.

The response is parsed to extract the actions field; one retry is attempted if parsing fails. There is no backtracking loop: unlike the full LLM 3-TAMP system, no feasibility signal is available, so the method is equivalent to a structured CoT baseline. 

Purpose of the baseline. LLM-TAMP-prompt provides a contextual test of structured CoT output under the Qwen harness, without any constraint enforcement. It reaches 51.1% Task SR on VH AS (Section A3.2). We do not report a prompting gain: this table contains no matched bare-Qwen row, whereas the 21.3% bare row belongs to the sep-arate matched-Llama track. Its Task SR is reported only as contextual evidence and is not subtracted from the matched Llama C LAMP -world value. The mechanisms differ in whether they apply per-token goal-reachability lookahead ( Drch backward DP), and the backbones/interfaces also differ, so this run does not rule out other prompting methods. A2.6.3 CLAMP -token and C LAMP -world 

CLAMP -token and C LAMP -world are described in Section 5. Both differ from the external baselines above by enforcing constraints inside the decoder: they set the logit of every violating token to −∞ 

before sampling. No reprompting occurs; config-ured violations are masked before sampling rather than merely made empirically unlikely. Table 7 summarises the four methods. 

A2.7 Controlled decoding-baseline adaptations 

The controlled VirtualHome diagnostic converts the original Watch-And-Help tasks into single-agent, text-only, open-loop planning. Every method receives the same initial symbolic scene and goal, emits the same VirtualHome JSON ac-tions, and is scored by the same MotionPlanner evaluator. Interaction, turn-taking, observation up-dates, and execution-time replanning are disabled. 

CTRL -G. The adaptation retains token-level grammar constraints and HMM lookahead. Its grammar accepts the shared VirtualHome action format, and its HMM is self-distilled from continu-ations of the same frozen Llama-3.1-8B backbone. It does not use C LAMP ’s prompt-derived transition graph, semantic HMM, backward goal reachability, goal value, or goal-based stopping. 

SAFE DEC . The original method controls low-level robot-policy tokens under system dynamics and signal-temporal-logic constraints, so its native implementation cannot be run as a text planner. We adapt its HCD and RCD variants with the shared action parser and prompt-derived symbolic dynam-ics. HCD masks an action once it is determined in-valid; RCD instead applies a soft penalty from pre-dicted constraint satisfaction. Neither variant uses CLAMP ’s semantic HMM, backward goal planning, goal value, or goal-based stopping. These adaptations retain each method’s core de-coding mechanism under one common interface. The resulting table compares the adapted mecha-nisms rather than the original end-to-end systems. 

A2.8 Safety Chip backend calibration 

Before applying Safety Chip as an external base-line on EAI VH/BEHAVIOR or SafeAgentBench (Section 5.3), we replicate its authors’ VirtualHome demo set under our Qwen3-VL-8B backend with thinking disabled. Table 8 reports 100% safety in the full arm, 30 −38% in the null (no-LTL) arm, and an intermediate 54 −62% in the bad (broken-LTL) arm. This is a bounded backend calibration, not evidence that the external method transfers un-changed to a new constraint specification. 

Reproduction record. The archived cross prod-uct contains 10 task–instruction pairs, two scenes, five trials, and three safety arms. Per-rollout out-puts are stored under ltl-safety/results in the 

SueMintony/embodied-agents-results artifact repository. 

A3 Detailed Experimental Results 

The results are organized by evaluation setting: text-only embodied planning, multimodal ground-ing and adaptation, safety-constrained planning, transfer diagnostics, and computational cost. 

A3.1 Controlled VirtualHome comparison 

The original C TRL -G and S AFE DEC systems use different interfaces, so Figure 4 compares author-adapted decoders under one VirtualHome text-planning interface. All methods receive the same scene state and goal, emit the same JSON actions, and use the same frozen Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct backbone, prompt, greedy decoder, action bud-get, and MotionPlanner evaluator. CTRL -G re-tains its grammar and HMM lookahead but not CLAMP ’s transition graph, backward goal planning, goal value, or goal-based stopping. The adapted SAFE DEC variants share a parser and symbolic dynamics; HCD masks invalid completed actions, whereas RCD assigns a soft penalty. Neither uses CLAMP ’s semantic HMM or backward goal value. Because task success is at the floor for most rows, executable traces and goal-predicate overlap are more informative than task success alone. C LAMP 

reaches 40 .0% executable traces and 39 .4% goal overlap; the strongest adapted baselines reach 

25 .0% and 9.6% , respectively. These numbers compare mechanisms after interface adaptation, not the native end-to-end systems. 

A3.2 EAI VirtualHome AS / SD: full results 

Figure 5 places the matched VirtualHome results beside the BEHAVIOR interface diagnostics and contextual external-system rows. The transfer evidence separates matched de-coder effects from contextual comparisons. Within the matched Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct VirtualHome block, the DFA token mask raises Action Sequenc-ing Task SR from 21 .3% to 48 .7% , and adding Table 7: Mechanism comparison for the four EAI configurations. Task SR is omitted because the contextual Qwen external-baseline rows and matched Llama rows use different backbones and interfaces. “Hard” denotes a structural decoder constraint under its stated symbolic assumptions.                             

> Method Constraint location Enforced condition Reprompt Evaluation track Safety Chip Outside decoder Empirical plan check Up to 3 ×Contextual Qwen LLM-TAMP-prompt Outside decoder None beyond parsing 1×(parse) Contextual Qwen CLAMP -token Inside decoder Hard format/vocab/arity Never Matched Llama CLAMP -world Inside decoder Hard interface + symbolic reach-ability Never Matched Llama
> 010 20 30 40
> Base Ctrl-G HCD ▲
> RCD ♦
> CLAMP
> 2.1 2.1 25.0 6.4 20.0 9.6 10.0 40.0 39.4 000000
> Rate (%) Task success Executable trace Goal overlap

Figure 4: Adapted common-interface VirtualHome diagnostic. The methods share the frozen Llama-3.1-8B backbone, prompt template, JSON action interface, action budget, greedy policy, and symbolic evaluator; their constraint and adaptation mechanisms differ. HCD and RCD denote author-adapted hard-constrained and robustness-conditioned SafeDec variants. Values at the origin are measured zeros. The retained rebuttal record does not state the episode denominator, so these percentages support only a descriptive diagnostic, not count-based uncertainty or significance claims. The figure does not compare the original end-to-end systems.                             

> Scene Arm Completed Safe Both
> mobile_manip full 49/50 50/50 49/50
> mobile_manip bad 48/50 31/50 31/50
> mobile_manip null 47/50 15/50 15/50
> rooms full 49/50 50/50 49/50
> rooms bad 50/50 27/50 27/50
> rooms null 50/50 19/50 19/50

Table 8: Safety Chip backend calibration on its Virtu-alHome demo set (10 task–instruction pairs × 2 scenes 

× 5 trials × 3 safety arms, n=300 rollouts; Qwen3-VL-8B with thinking disabled). Three safety_level arms: 

full = correct LTL constraints, bad = deliberately bro-ken LTL, null = no LTL (unconstrained planner). The 

full arm reaches 100% safety and 98% task completion in both scenes; the null arm is 30 −38% safe. Transfer results also depend on the target constraint specification. 

backward reachability reaches 85 .3% ; Subgoal De-composition follows 48 .8% → 60 .1% → 79 .8% .Flat reachability keeps execution rates high but often selects goal-irrelevant actions, whereas the backward DP shifts token scores toward continua-tions that can reach the goal within the remaining budget. This distinction accounts for most of the Action Sequencing gain. The published VirtualHome models and author-adapted Safety Chip/LLM-TAMP-prompt rows are shown only as context because their models or in-terfaces are unmatched. The stricter matched com-parison with C TRL -G and S AFE DEC appears in Figure 4. 

A3.3 BEHAVIOR interface diagnostics 

BEHAVIOR has three modules: Goal Interpreta-tion (GI), Action Sequencing (AS), and Subgoal Decomposition (SD). Panels (b)–(c) of Figure 5 report its GI and SD results at the token-interface diagnostic stage. Goal Interpretation reports node, edge, and aggregate F 1, all higher-is-better; the best CLAMP grid point uses λdiag =0 .05 and cap =100 .The affordance DFA reduces aggregate F 1 from 

0.2524 (unconstrained) to 0.1481 (DFA-only) be-cause it assigns near-zero mass to relational pred-icates such as INSIDE(x,y) . The HMM bridge partially recovers aggregate F 1 to 0.1905 but can-not restore tokens that the DFA has fully masked. 20 40 60 80 100 

> CLAMP -world DFA-only / C LAMP -token Llama-3.1-8B baseline LLM-TAMP-prompt †
> Safety Chip †
> Mixtral 8x22B MoE Mistral Large Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct o1-preview o1-mini GPT-4o Gemini 1.5 Pro Claude-3.5 Sonnet Claude-3 Opus

Success rate (%) ↑

(a) EAI VirtualHome transfer        

> AS Task AS Exec. SD Task SD Exec.
> 00.1 0 .2 0 .3
> λdiag =1 .00
> λdiag =0 .30
> λdiag =0 .10
> λdiag =0 .05
> DFA-only Baseline

F1 (proportion) ↑

(b) BEHAVIOR GI      

> Node Edge Aggregate
> 0 0 .10 .20 .3
> λdiag =5 ·10 −2
> λdiag =10 −2
> λdiag =5 ·10 −3
> λdiag =10 −3
> DFA-only Baseline

Rate / error (proportion) 

(c) BEHAVIOR SD     

> Task SR ↑PredArg ↓
> Halluc. ↓

Figure 5: Transfer results in native benchmark units. (a) EAI VirtualHome ( n=338 tasks): Action Sequencing and Subgoal Decomposition Task/Execution success. The navy band is the matched Llama track; amber † rows are contextual Qwen3-VL adapters and are not matched to it; gray rows are published context. (b) BEHAVIOR Goal Interpretation ( n=100 tasks), reporting F 1 (↑). (c) BEHAVIOR Subgoal Decomposition ( n=100 tasks), reporting Task SR ( ↑), parsed-argument error, and hallucination ( ↓). Panels (b)–(c) use matched Llama rows: circles, squares, and diamonds identify metrics; light blue, teal, and navy identify the baseline, DFA-only, and DFA+HMM configurations, respectively. λdiag is the finite legacy soft-score weight, not the binary validity masks. 

Subgoal Decomposition reports Task SR (higher-is-better), parsed-argument error, and hallucination (both lower-is-better) at T =0 . The token mask reduces parsed-argument error but halves Task SR from 0.21 to 0.10 ; the HMM then fragments one structured item into approximately 90 single-item subgoals, increasing hallucination. On AS, CLAMP -token improves Task SR slightly ( 12% →

13% ) while eliminating parse errors. These re-sults reflect interface misspecification rather than a reachability result: we do not evaluate the full 

Drch on BEHAVIOR, and zero parse errors do not establish that the supplied symbolic interface is correct. 

A3.4 VLABench Mode A: in-domain HMM weight sweep 

Figure 6 compares the complete HMM-weight sweep and the corresponding dimension-level behavior across the two evaluated backbones. Panel (a) of Figure 6 reports the full λdiag sweep on the in-domain HMM ( hmm-vlabench-h128 ) us-ing the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct backbone on the 

480 -prompt VLABench Mode A subset (no vision). DFA-only is the strongest configuration ( 29 .6 To-tal). Cross-domain HMMs ( HMM-VH , HMM-BEH ) are numerically identical because both checkpoints place near-uniform mass on VLABench skill vocab-ulary. The in-domain HMM-VLABench grid shows the monotone collapse described in Section A3.7 D1: at λdiag =1 .0 Total drops to 11 .9, 16 .4 points 

below the cross-domain HMMs. Panel (b) extends the comparison to per-dimension scores across both backbones. The displayed HMM point is the measured configu-ration with the highest pooled Total within each backbone-specific grid; selection is performed sep-arately for VL-A and VL-B. The DFA gain appears on six of six dimensions in Mode A and five of six in Mode B; Physical Laws collapses to 0.0 un-Base DFA VH=BEH .01 .05 .10 .30 .50 1.0 020 40 60 80 100 controls HMM-VLABench 

> Diagnostic score (0–100)

(a) VL-A: Llama controls and HMM-weight sweep          

> Baseline DFA-only VH =BEH Total Skill Entity Exact Format-valid
> Common Sense Complex M&T Physical Laws Semantic Spatial Llama base Llama DFA Llama DFA+HMM (.01) Qwen3 base Qwen3 DFA
> 18 .9 19 .7 21 .9 5 .1 16 .6 18 .834 .7 32 .7 38 .6 10 .8 30 .7 29 .735 .3 30 .2 36 .9 7 .1 28 .3 27 .822 .7 24 .3 22 .6 3 .4 21 .4 25 .626 .9 29 .2 37 .9029 .2 26 .9

(b) VL-A / VL-B per-dimension diagnostics     

> 010 20 30 40
> Local total (0–100)

Figure 6: Pipeline-specific VLABench diagnostics (all scores 0–100 ; higher is better). (a) VL-A uses Llama-3.1-8B with text-only prompts ( n=480 ); VH and BEH overlap, and .01–1.0 are λdiag values for the in-domain HMM. (b) 

VL-A rows are separated from the Qwen3-VL multimodal VL-B rows; the Llama HMM row uses λdiag =0 .01 , the highest pooled Total among the measured in-domain HMM settings in panel (a). These diagnostic totals use pooled component means and are not the VL-main macro scores in Table 1. 

Method Total Skill Entity Exact Fmt. Baseline 20.1 59.8 0.5 0.0 100.0 

+ hard Dγ 25.1 40.6 32.7 2.1 100.0 

Table 9: VL-B diagnostic: Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct (n=480 ). Scores are pooled component percentages ( 0–

100 ); Total is the mean of Skill, Entity, and Exact. The hard DFA yields 4,200 /4,200 valid format checks and a +5 .0-point Total. These values are not the dimension-macro VL-main scores in Table 1. Bold marks the better value within these two matched rows; ties are both bold. 

der Qwen3-VL DFA-only because that dimension is QA, not skill sequencing. Per-example analy-sis further shows that the in-domain HMM helps 

56 prompts and hurts 129 . Its learned marginal sequence length (approximately 44 tokens) does not distinguish short Physical Laws plans (approxi-mately 25 tokens) from Complex plans (approx-imately 160 tokens), explaining the monotonic degradation as the HMM weight increases. 

A3.5 VLABench Mode B: cross-backbone dimension analysis 

Table 9 isolates the Qwen3-VL dimension scores used to interpret the Mode A/Mode B gap. Physical Laws is the weakest dimension in both modes: the Mode A DFA-only ceiling is 10 .8,while Mode B DFA-only reaches 0.0 (Table 9). These 80 prompts constitute 16 .7% of the 480 -prompt evaluation but account for approximately 

40% of the Mode A to Mode B total gap. Their target is a single press[N] action, whereas both backbones frequently interpret the scene as a ma-nipulation task and emit pick -based plans. R3’s collapse onto press therefore helps Physical Laws, while R0 and R3 both score zero on the dimensions that require entity-grounded pick actions. 

A3.6 Matched InternVL3.5 validation 

The second-backbone experiment uses 474 

prompts from Mesh & Texture, Spatial, Common Sense, and Semantic. The baseline and C LAMP 

rows share the same frozen InternVL3.5-8B re-vision, two-image prompts, annotations, action schema, entity vocabulary, and evaluator. The constrained row adds a tokenizer DFA and an HMM trained on model-sampled continuations with λdiag = 0 .1. Physical Laws and Complex were not evaluated. We report a four-dimensional local total and do not compare it numerically with the six-dimension Qwen3-VL Macro score. Format validity remains 100 .0 → 100 .0 (∆=0 .0TASK INSTRUCTION "This dish lacks a deep, tangy touch. Maybe adding something could elevate its taste."                                                                             

> (a) Synchronized model inputs: four RGB views and entity-ID masks
> CAM 1 CAM 2 CAM 3 CAM 4
> RGB
> Entity-ID mask
> (b) Plan repair: names become integer IDs; the extra action is removed
> Unconstrained pick("bbq_sauce") →pour("pan_seen") →place("dishes")
> CLAMP pick(4) pour(2) STOP Exact plan 0 → 1
> (c) DFA: format and schema
> Illegal next tokens receive probability 0.
> Decision / token Before After
> t=0: ``` 92.12% 0%
> t=0: JSON open {1.9e-07% 78.56%
> t=20: quote "96.27% 0%
> t=20: numeric SPACE 3.73% 99.997% "bbq_sauce" →integer ID 4
> (d) Visibility: entity grounding
> PICK: bbq_sauce [4], salad_dressing [5], hotsauce [6] POUR: pan_seen [2], dishes [3]
> IDs 4 and 2 are supported by the observation. Dishes [3] is also visible: the HMM stop explains removal of place(dishes). No separate visibility probability was captured.
> (e) Decoder trace: action-aligned evidence and HMM stop reweighting
> Probabilities: raw frozen-VLM output → after constrained decoding
> Step Decision / candidate Raw VLM After CLAMP
> 10 PICK 91.80% 91.49%
> 21 bbq_sauce [4] 55.92% 55.96%
> 21 salad_dressing [5] 29.93% 29.96%
> 21 hotsauce [6] 9.72% 9.73%
> 22 NEXT }}, 97.26% 97.28%
> 27 POUR 88.42% 87.80%
> 39 continue }}, 88.03% 30.12%
> 39 STOP }} 11.91% 69.83%
> At t=21: +0.574 per legal ID; 4 > 5 > 6
> At t=39: +2.841 relative log-odds toward STOP; the extra place action is removed.

Figure 7: Case study: how C LAMP repairs an exe-cutable condiment plan. The instruction and synchro-nized RGB/entity-ID views support barbecue sauce as the target. The unconstrained VLM recovers the in-tended pick–pour relation but uses object names and appends place(dishes) . The DFA removes illegal for-mat and name tokens and enforces integer-ID arguments, yielding pick(4) → pour(2) . Visibility grounds IDs 4 and 2 to observed entities, while dishes [3] remains visi-ble. At the final decision, the HMM raises P (STOP )

from 11 .91% to 69 .83% , removing the unnecessary 

place action. This trace demonstrates symbolic de-coding, not improved semantic recognition or rollout execution. 

points, 95% CI [ 0.0, 0.0]), while skill F1 changes only from 72 .0 → 74 .3 (∆= + 2 .3 points, 95% CI [+1 , +3 ]). The larger changes are concentrated in entity-schema compliance: entity-ID validity rises from 1.9 → 100 .0 (∆= + 98 .1 points, 95% CI [ +97 , +99 ]), entity F1 from 0.9 → 55 .7 (∆= + 54 .8 points, 95% CI [ +52 , +58 ]), exact match from 0.0 → 25 .1 (∆= + 25 .1 points, 95% CI [ +21 ,

+29 ]), and the four-dimensional local total from 

24 .3 → 51 .7 (∆= + 27 .4 points, 95% CI [ +25 ,

+30 ]). The matched-subset InternVL block in Table 1 shows gains in every evaluated dimension. Figure 2 locates the larger changes in entity and schema compliance: decode-time constraints make frozen InternVL’s predictions conform to the supplied ac-

Configuration Overall ↑ PL ↑

n=480 n=78 

R0: source HMM 0.0 0.0 R1: TTDA 1.0 6.4 R2: TTBA 5.8 35.9 R3: TTDA + TTBA 9.6 59.0 

R4: TTDA + OTTA 1.0 6.4 

Table 10: VLABench TTA ablation with frozen Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct. All configurations share the same generation and evaluation pipeline. Scores use the pooled VL-TTA evaluator ( 0–100 ): 100(skill+entity + exact) /3. Overall pools all 480 prompts; PL denotes the 78 Physical Laws prompts. Bold marks column maxima. 

tion and entity interface. These results do not show that C LAMP adds visual knowledge. 

A3.7 TTA tier ablation: full results 

Table 10 compares offline domain adaptation (TTDA), online session adaptation (OTTA), and per-instance batch adaptation (TTBA) under the same generation and evaluation pipeline. Overall averages the VL-TTA score over all 480 

evaluated prompts; PL restricts the average to the 

78 Physical Laws prompts. For R2 and R3, TTBA draws five unconstrained continuations per prompt and performs one emission-only Baum–Welch up-date before decoding the plan with the adapted emissions fixed. 

Physical Laws. TTDA + TTBA (R3) reaches 

59 .0 on Physical Laws and 9.6 overall, compared with 6.4 and 1.0 for TTDA alone (R1). The Physical Laws tasks require press[N] , where N

is an entity argument. R3 obtains skill_match 

= 1 .000 (every prompt gets the right verb) and 

entity_match = 0 .385 . Relative to TTDA alone (R1), the combined TTDA+TTBA configuration (R3) is +52 .6 on this dimension and +8 .6 overall. The gain is confined to Physical Laws; all configu-rations score zero on the remaining prompts. 

Generated-plan behavior. R0 emits open_door 

on all 480 prompts, while R3 emits press on all 

480 . TTBA changes the dominant skill without recovering task-specific action selection. Concen-tration on short completions is a possible explana-tion for this single-skill behaviour. HMM scores can outweigh the base VLM’s preferences among allowed tokens, but cannot override a hard DFA rejection. OTTA contributes zero in the matched mea-sured contrast. R4 and R1 have identical Overall and PL scores. Appendix A4.2 examines three possible mechanisms: self-reinforcement from the model’s own outputs rather than GT, a near-uniform entity distribution that removes the per-task signal, and limited token diversity in the short sequences used to estimate a high-dimensional emission matrix. 

Fast cross-domain HMM calibration. The plan-ning factorial above is distinct from the measured VH-to-BEHAVIOR HMM-calibration run in Ta-ble 12. On 30K target continuations, three Baum– Welch iterations reduce per-token negative log-likelihood (NLL) from 7.132 to 3.095 (56 .6% ) at approximately 139 seconds per iteration, or 417 

seconds total. Emission calibration therefore takes approximately seven minutes without VLM fine-tuning, but this result does not establish uniform task-success gains. 

A3.8 SafeAgentBench: compilation, mechanism analysis, and Phase 2 

This section expands the main SafeAgentBench result in Section 5.3. 

Benchmark structure. SafeAgentBench differs from EAI and VLABench in that it provides ex-plicit safety labels : the question is not whether the plan reaches the goal, but whether it avoids prescribed hazards. This separates constraint en-forcement from task success. Safety Chip and LLM 3-TAMP provide relevant baselines because both were designed for safety-constrained plan-ning. The benchmark splits into two regimes. 

Long-horizon 50 : each task carries an explicit NL “Requirement” clause (e.g. “Turn off the stove burner within no more than two steps of turning it on” ); we compile this into a syn-tax DFA over the 17 -action vocabulary plus a 

Drch temporal rule (BEFORE / WITHIN patterns) and generate the full plan under joint syntax– reachability enforcement. Evaluation is LLM semantic judgement (RR(LLM)) using Claude Haiku 4.5 ( anthropic/claude-haiku-4.5 via OpenRouter) with 3-vote majority, so AI2-THOR execution is not required for the reported LLM-judge score. Detailed 300 + Abstract 100 : the hazard is implicit in the instruction; C LAMP can-not compile a per-task constraint, so we precom-pile ten safety rules encoded in Drch —one per haz-ard class in the SafeAgentBench taxonomy (Fire, Electrical Shock, Explosion, Poisoning, Slip, Liq-uid Damage, Breakage, Appliance Misuse, Furni-ture Damage, Small Item Damage)—and report whether the generated plan avoids violating these rules. The Rejection-Rate metric does not apply directly: C LAMP prevents violating actions struc-turally (by logit masking) rather than refusing the task at the LLM level ; the relevant comparison met-ric is RR(LLM) on the generated plan. 

Metric directions (Table 2). The main table groups splits into two regimes because Rej and Compl. have opposite desirable directions in each. On the hazard splits (Unsafe-Detailed, Abstract) re-jecting a hazardous instruction is good (Rej ↑) and completing it is bad (Compl. ↓). On the legitimate-task splits the instruction is something the agent 

should carry out, so the roles reverse: completing is desirable (Compl. ↑) and a blanket rejection is a failure (Rej ↓). This regime covers Long-horizon ,where the agent must complete the task while hon-oring a temporal Requirement (its primary sig-nal C-Safe ↑ / C-Unsafe ↓ does not reverse), and the already-safe Safe-Detailed control (rejecting it would be over-refusal). The Drch post-hoc columns (Plan-clean ↑, Viol. ↓) are split-independent. 

Mechanism: C LAMP -policy recovery. CLAMP -token (Tier I, prefix-local masks only) does not 

help: its reachability-violation rate ( 0.40 ) is statis-tically indistinguishable from the bare baseline’s (0.41 ); format enforcement alone is insufficient when the safety constraint is temporal. The Phase-1 improvement comes from a backup-and-retry 

extension of the decoder: when Drch rejects a step’s terminator, the decoder rewinds to the start of that step’s verb, bans the verb at this position, replays the token-DFA and reachability states, and re-samples. If retries do not place the required action in the top-k set by its deadline, the policy proposes that action directly. The proposal is com-mitted only if the syntax and visibility masks admit its serialization and ∆( zt, a ) is defined; otherwise the policy returns F AIL . A forward-only Drch that merely halts at violations performs worse than the baseline because it removes the rejection escape hatch. 

Residual violations. The remaining 0.05 vio-lation rate on Long-horizon reflects the bound-ary between enforcement and specification cov-erage. In particular, aliases such as close versus 

toggle_off must be mapped into the same sym-bolic action before the temporal rule can be en-forced. The decoder cannot repair a rule whose required action is absent from the supplied inter-face. 

Compilation pipeline and wall-clock. Compil-ing the 50 NL Requirement clauses into Drch 

specs uses Qwen3-VL itself and runs in under one minute total; we cache the compiled specs. Per-task wall-clock on a single H100 is 3–5 s for C LAMP -token and 2–8 s for C LAMP -policy (variance from backup-and-retry depth). 

Phase 1 results (long-horizon). With the backup-and-retry decoding above and validated forced-action injection at the deadline, C LAMP -policy lifts the LLM-judged C-Safe rate 0.06 → 0.18 (3×), the post-hoc Drch plan-clean rate 0.52 → 0.94 

(+42 pp), and reduces the per-constraint violation rate 0.41 → 0.05 (−88% relative). 

Phase 2 (Detailed + Abstract): full-scale re-sults. For the splits without a per-task Require-ment clause we instantiate the universal Drch from each task’s hazard label, with an 18 -alias mapping covering observed upstream label variants. On the full 300 -task unsafe-detailed split the post-hoc vi-olation rate drops 0.205 → 0.021 (a 10 × reduc-tion; plan-clean 0.74 → 0.97 ), and on the full 

100 -task abstract split 0.180 → 0.043 (a 4× re-duction). The residual non-zero rates come from two upstream hazard categories ( Inaccessibility ,

Physical Harm / Poisoning ) not yet mapped into our 10 -class taxonomy. On unsafe-detailed-300 ,RR(LLM)-safe rises 0.16 → 0.27 (+11 pp) and RR(LLM)-unsafe drops 0.32 → 0.23 (−9 pp); on abstract-100 the judge moves +3 pp on RR-safe; the Drch checker shows the larger change. A safe-detailed-300 control (C LAMP -token only, no reach-ability filter) shows no significant effect ( −1 pp on RR-safe, within judge noise), consistent with the action-level Drch driving the improvement. 

Cross-judge replication. A cross-judge with Claude Sonnet 4.6 shows the same direction on ab-stract: Sonnet rates the bare baseline more leniently (0.56 vs. Haiku’s 0.36 ) but agrees C LAMP -policy is at least as safe ( 0.60 ≥ 0.56 ). 

A3.9 TaPA-60 grounding diagnostic 

VLABench’s skill vocabulary is closed ( pick /place / pour / press ); by contrast, TaPA tests 

open-vocabulary free-form NL planning grounded to a scene-level object list acquired by an open-vocabulary detector (Detic / Grounding-DINO over six AI2-THOR multi-view RGB images). This directly probes C LAMP ’s Tier-II visual-grounding constraint DEseen . Table 11 reports plan-success rate on TaPA’s 60 -triplet evaluation set. The matched Qwen3-VL comparison shows a trade-off: the out-of-scene reference rate falls from 10 .0% to 8.3% 

with C LAMP -vg, and Kitchen plan success rises from 35 .7% to 50 .0% , but average plan success falls from 71 .7% to 68 .3% (and to 66 .7% with CLAMP -token). Published TaPA rows use human judgments and are contextual only. The self-judge is also sensitive to harness metadata, so the TaPA result supports only the narrower grounding diag-nosis, not an overall task-success improvement. 

A3.10 TaPA judge protocol sensitivity and failure modes 

The TaPA paper (Wu et al., 2023) judges plan suc-cess with 3 human volunteers per plan (success iff 

≥ 2 vote yes). For the matched diagnostic, we use a Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct self-judge with the same rubric, called 3 times per plan at T =0 .3 with seeds {42 , 43 , 44 } and majority vote. The protocol processes 180 calls in ∼7 min. Although each call is seeded, its verdict is not invariant to surrounding harness metadata. 

Two known failure modes. The self-judge pro-duces different verdicts on byte-identical plans 

across configs: on five regression cases between baseline and C LAMP -vg, two pairs (id 40 turn on the lamp ; id 54 clean the bathroom ) had identical plans but 3/3 True for one config and 0/3 True for the other. The plan content was the same—only the surrounding harness metadata differed. On long plans ( ≥ 25 steps), the self-judge also misclassi-fies in-scene objects as hallucinations: id 51 v2’s 

32 -step plan was flagged 3/3 False with reasoning 

"hallucinated objects: TissueBox, Plunger, Scrub-Brush, Candle, ToiletPaper" , all five of which were in the scene’s GT object list. 

Implication. The aggregate plan-success compar-ison is sensitive to judge context and plan length. We report the raw three-vote scores and use the hallucination rate only as a grounding-specific di-agnostic. 

A3.11 Compute and wall-clock 

Qwen3-VL and Llama experiments use a sin-gle NVIDIA GH200 (96 GB HBM, bf16). The Method Kit. Living. Bed. Bath. Published macro Matched overall Halluc. ↓                                                   

> Published TaPA rows: room-macro summary; three-volunteer human judgment
> LLaVA-7B 14.3 42.1 33.3 0.0 22.4 ––LLaMA-7B (no fine-tune) 0.0 10.5 13.3 0.0 6.0 ––GPT-3.5 28.6 73.7 66.7 50.0 54.7 ––TaPA fine-tuned LLaMA-7B 28.6 84.2 73.3 58.3 61.1 ––
> Matched Qwen3-VL-8B rows: pooled 60-plan summary; three-vote Qwen3-VL self-judge
> Baseline (no constraint) 35.7 84.2 80.0 83.3 –71.7 10.0% CLAMP -token (verb DFA) 42.9 84.2 73.3 58.3 –66.7 10.0% CLAMP -vg ( +DEseen )50.0 84.2 73.3 58.3 –68.3 8.3%

Table 11: TaPA-60 grounding diagnostic (Wu et al., 2023). Room denominators are Kitchen 14, Living Room 19, Bedroom 15, and Bathroom 12. For published rows, Published macro is the unweighted mean of the four room percentages. For matched rows, Matched overall is successful plans divided by all 60 plans. The two summary columns therefore expose, rather than mix, the different aggregation rules; dashes mark an inapplicable summary. Halluc. is the fraction of plans containing an out-of-scene reference. Published rows use human majority votes, whereas matched rows use the self-judge audited in Appendix A3.10. Bold marks the best value within each judgment and aggregation block; ties are all bold. 

matched InternVL3.5 experiment uses a single RTX A6000. Tables 12 and 13 report adapta-tion time and amortized end-to-end run time per prompt.                     

> Status Operation Time Outcome / scope
> Measured VH-to-BEHAVIOR BW (30K; 3 EM iterations)
> 417 sper-token NLL
> 7.132 →3.095
> (↓)Measured TTBA increment (R3 −R1)
> +18 .1
> s/prompt Physical Laws
> +52 .6points Estimated Qwen target sampling
> 6–10 hplanning estimate Estimated HMM from scratch, 30 epochs
> 1–2hplanning estimate Estimated warm-start HMM, 5 epochs
> ∼20 min planning estimate

Table 12: HMM adaptation and reference costs. 

VH denotes VirtualHome, BW Baum–Welch, EM expectation–maximization, and TTBA test-time batch adaptation. The first two rows are measured; the from-scratch references come from the experiment plan, as-sume one GH200 with the stated continuation volume, and are not used to claim an exact speedup. NLL denotes negative log-likelihood; lower is better. The TTBA increment is a difference in amortized run time per prompt. The VLM is frozen in all rows. 

Within-path configuration differences include sampling, emission updates, reinitialization, and changes in generated sequence length. The R0– DFA difference also changes the serving path and cannot isolate HMM overhead. 

Serving-path contribution to the DFA–R0 dif-ference. DFA-only routes through the vLLM 

/v1/completions API with guided_regex , tak-ing advantage of PagedAttention and batched in-ference. The measured R0–R4 rows fall back to single-prompt HuggingFace model.generate() 

because the per-token G AMMA PROCESSOR call-back that adds HMM-based guidance scores into the logit stream is incompatible with vLLM’s pre-compiled generation loop. The same limitation ex-plains why the TaPA decoder uses a custom top-K logprob filter (per-token round-trip ∼50 ms) rather than vLLM-native constrained decoding. 

TTA overhead breakdown. The measured TTBA difference in amortized time is 17 .0

s/prompt without TTDA (R2 −R0) and 18 .1

s/prompt with TTDA (R3 −R1). A micro-profile attributes about 12 .5 s to five extra Qwen3-VL sam-ples, 1 s to one Baum–Welch update, and 0.2 sto processor reinitialization; the remainder is un-allocated end-to-end overhead. The within-path OTTA difference is 2.0 s/prompt (R4 −R1). These single-run differences are not isolated timings of the update routines. 

Aggregate cost. The measured VLABench con-figurations in Table 13 sum to approximately 14 

GH200-hours; TaPA generation takes less than one GPU-hour. Projected rows are excluded from this total. Configuration Serving path Amortized time (s/prompt) Contrast                               

> Bare VLM vLLM batched 3.9 Run-time reference DFA only vLLM guided regex 4.0 +0 .1vs. Bare VLM R0: HMM lookahead HF + callback 13.2 +9 .2vs. DFA only †
> R1: TTDA HF + callback 12.9 Reference for R4 and R3 R4: TTDA + OTTA HF + callback 14.9 +2 .0vs. R1 R2: TTBA HF + callback 30.2 +17 .0vs. R0 R3: TTDA + TTBA HF + callback 31.0 +18 .1vs. R1 R5: full TTA HF + callback 33.0 +2 .0vs. R3 (projected)

Table 13: Amortized run time on VLABench-480 (one GH200, bf16). Each measured value is a complete 480-prompt run’s wall-clock time divided by 480, rather than a measured request-response latency. The timing artifact records no repeated runs, warm-up exclusion, or dispersion. The final column identifies each comparison. Within the same serving path, DFA–bare, R4–R1, R2–R0, and R3–R1 are configuration contrasts; they include any changes in generated sequence length. Only R5 is projected. †The R0–DFA contrast also changes the serving path from batched vLLM to single-prompt HF generation and therefore does not isolate HMM overhead. 

A4 Cross-Experiment Diagnostic Analysis 

This section synthesizes the mechanisms shared across benchmarks after the benchmark-specific evidence has been reported. 

A4.1 Diagnostic findings across evaluation settings 

The benchmark-specific sections above contain the quantitative evidence. This section connects those results through five recurring mechanisms. 

(D1) In-domain HMM degrades DFA-only. 

The Mode A sweep (Appendix A3.4) shows that an in-domain HMM can encode an unhelpful marginal length prior even when its vocabulary is matched to the benchmark. Increasing its soft-score weight then degrades the surviving token ranking while leaving the hard masks unchanged. Domain match-ing alone is therefore insufficient; the HMM must also distinguish the task-conditioned continuation regimes it is intended to rank. 

(D2) Physical Laws is the weakest evaluated dimension. The Mode A/Mode B comparison in Table 9 isolates a task-type mismatch: Physi-cal Laws expects a short QA-style press[N] plan, while the backbones often emit manipulation plans. This mismatch explains why a global press prior helps that dimension but cannot generalize to the entity-grounded dimensions. 

(D3) Backward reachability raises Virtual-Home AS success. The VirtualHome results (Ap-pendix A3.2) distinguish local executability from goal-directed planning. A flat filter retains actions that are immediately executable, whereas the back-ward DP favors actions whose successor states can still reach the goal within budget. Residual failures track incomplete predicate coverage in the supplied transition model. 

(D4) DFA misspecification on BEHAVIOR. 

The BEHAVIOR panels in Figure 5 show that hard filtering inherits errors in the supplied interface. Relational predicates masked by the GI automa-ton cannot be recovered by a finite HMM score, while the SD automaton changes output granular-ity and reduces task success despite eliminating parse errors. Constraint enforcement therefore de-pends on a task-compatible specification, not only on decoder correctness. 

(D5) HMM single-skill collapse. The generated plans (Appendix A3.7) show single-skill outputs both before and after TTBA: R0 selects open_door 

and R3 selects press throughout. R3’s dominant verb matches the Physical Laws tasks, explaining the concentration of its score gain in that dimension. Appendix A4.2 separates this failure from OTTA’s lack of a measured gain. 

A4.2 OTTA failure-mechanism diagnosis 

In the measured TTA contrast (Table 10), online task-level adaptation contributes +0 .0: R4 and R1 have the same Overall and PL scores. Their raw outputs differ in 321 /480 cases, but only 6/480 

differ in skill name, and those six are random 

open_door ↔press flips with no consistent direc-tion. Three possible mechanisms are discussed below; the matched scores alone do not identify their individual contributions. Self-reinforcement of wrong beliefs. OTTA up-dates B from the model’s own decoded output rather than from ground truth. If the planner incor-rectly generates open_door , that output becomes part of the self-supervision used to update B, cre-ating a feedback loop that can reinforce the same erroneous mode in subsequent instances. 

Near-uniform entity distribution erases the per-task signal. Within a VLABench task family, entity IDs are near-uniform across prompts (e.g. density_qa entity histogram 

{1:38% , 3:33% , 5:29% }). OTTA averages these into the session-level emission matrix, producing a near-uniform entity prior that provides no useful guidance at inference time. 

Limited observations for emission estimation. 

The emission matrix has H = 128 rows and |V | =151 ,936 columns. A short decoded sequence sup-plies few distinct token observations, but its length is not the number of updated parameters. Each ob-served token contributes posterior-weighted counts across hidden states; smoothing, row normaliza-tion, and interpolation can also change unobserved entries. The relevant limitation is the diversity and correctness of the adaptation data, rather than a parameter-update density inferred from token count. 

Possible extension: entity-focused adaptation. 

Restricting trainable emission logits to entity-ID to-ken columns could reduce the number of fitted vari-ables while preserving row normalization through softmax. This remains an untested design choice: it does not create additional entity evidence, resolve a near-uniform target distribution, or prevent self-reinforcement of incorrect outputs. A confidence-gated update or a better adaptation signal would require separate evaluation. 

A4.3 Coverage and non-subsumption of three targeted failure modes 

CLAMP treats structural , perceptual , and causal 

failures (Section 1) as three targeted modes. They are pairwise non-subsuming, so handling one mode does not handle the others. 

Pairwise non-subsumption. Suppose γ contains {red_cup_1 , red_cup_2 , drawer_1 }, but only 

red_cup_2 and drawer_1 are observable in 

o0. The call Pick (red_cup_1 ) can satisfy the action schema while violating visibility because 

red_cup_1 is absent from Eseen . Conversely, 

Place (red_cup_2 , drawer_1 ) can satisfy both syntax and visibility but remain non-executable while drawer_1 is closed. Even a sequence of exe-cutable actions can exhaust the action budget with-out reaching the goal. These examples show why syntax and visibility filtering do not replace state-dependent executability and budget-aware looka-head. An action-level reachability DP, in turn, as-sumes well-formed action inputs and cannot pre-vent a malformed token stream. 

Observed coverage. On a hand-labelled pilot of failed plans drawn from VirtualHome and VLABench, every failure matched at least one of the three modes; we did not observe a fourth category. This pilot does not establish universal coverage. The partition is useful because each mode maps to a distinct decode-time term: msyn ,n ,

mvis ,n , or the pair (mrch ,n , G rch ,n ). C LAMP com-poses these terms additively at the logit level (Sec-tion 4.2) without constructing their product automa-ton. Unlike prior text-only detectors, the visibility and reachability terms are instantiated as scene-grounded multimodal constraints. 

A5 Extended Discussion and Scope 

This section positions the decoding mechanism rel-ative to prior constrained-decoding methods and states its operating boundaries and broader impli-cations. 

A5.1 Constrained decoding methods: extended discussion 

This section expands on the constrained decoding literature surveyed in Section 2. 

Grammar- and FSM-based decoding. Many methods compile the target structure into a context-free grammar or finite-state machine and mask any token at each position that would render the partial output irrecoverably invalid. PICARD (Scholak et al., 2021) parses incrementally to enforce SQL grammar constraints on text-to-SQL outputs. Syn-chromesh (Poesia et al., 2022) pairs target similar-ity sampling with constrained semantic decoding for code generation. Outlines (Willard and Louf, 2023) compiles regular expressions into FSMs and applies token-level masks at every step. Grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) (Geng et al., 2023) generalizes this to arbitrary context-free grammars without finetuning. SynCode (Ugare et al., 2025) precomputes a DFA mask store from the gram-mar to amortize per-step token filtering. XGram-mar (Dong et al., 2025) reports up to 100 × speedup over prior masks by partitioning the vocabulary into context-independent tokens (prechecked of-fline) and context-dependent tokens (interpreted at runtime). 

Lookahead-based decoding. CTRL -G (Zhang et al., 2024a) pairs a deterministic finite automaton hard mask with an HMM lookahead that estimates the log-probability of reaching an accepting suffix from the current decoding state. The combination provides both a string-level structural guarantee and a soft guidance signal toward constraint satis-faction. C TRL -G is the most direct predecessor of CLAMP .

Why direct transfer to embodied planning is im-practical. The published methods above natively constrain token strings: their guarantee covers the produced sequence, not the action-state trajectory it denotes. A finite token-level automaton could encode a bounded action history, episode-specific visible entities, symbolic preconditions, and the remaining budget by expanding its state. That construction, however, couples the token grammar to the episode-specific world state and yields the large product automaton discussed in Section 4.2. CLAMP instead keeps the token grammar and action-state detector separate. Its per-token mask depends on current visual support and a dynamic-programming feasibility check over the symbolic state without constructing that product. 

A5.2 Discussion: limitations, real-world applicability, and broader impact A5.2.1 Limitations. 

CLAMP operates strictly at the symbolic-action level: physical safety during low-level motion exe-cution is out of scope and is delegated to a down-stream motion planner. The HMM lookahead com-ponent is sensitive to vocabulary and training distri-bution. In domains far from its source distribution, it can degrade to a near-uniform prior. Test-time adaptation reduces but does not eliminate this drift, especially when the test stream is short. The hand-written PDDL specifications used to seed ∆ re-quire additional engineering in new environments; the agentic specification source has been validated mainly on the VLABench Physical Laws subset. Test-time adaptation is also sensitive to limited data: small adaptation streams can overfit, the anchor weight λ must be tuned, and EM steps beyond a few iterations drift away from the domain prior. 

A5.2.2 Real-world applicability under partial observability and stochastic execution. 

CLAMP enforces feasibility under the supplied sym-bolic model at the symbolic-action interface, not at the physical-execution interface. The visibility detector is seeded from the initial observation o0,so tasks that require active perception (e.g., open-ing a fridge to reveal an unseen apple) fall outside this static visibility model. Because Eseen supports incremental updates, each replan can use the latest grounded entities, but this requires integration with an active-perception loop. The transition function ∆ in Drch is determin-istic. Physical-execution failures such as slips, collisions, and mis-grasps must be detected by a closed-loop skill controller and represented as state changes. The next replanning step can then run C LAMP with the updated Eseen and reachabil-ity state zt. Thus, C LAMP complements reactive TAMP (Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Yan et al., 2026) and online perception; it does not re-place the controller or replanning loop needed for motion-level reliability. 

A5.2.3 Broader impact. 

CLAMP moves constraint enforcement from prompting into an auditable, interruptible decoder without fine-tuning the underlying planner. The main risk is specification error: a misspecified PDDL or affordance model can make the permit-ted plans worse rather than safer because C LAMP 

enforces the supplied interface. We observe this on BEHAVIOR goal interpretation, where the af-fordance DFA is misaligned with the benchmark’s relational-predicate output format. Deployment in a new environment therefore requires a speci-fication audit. C LAMP should be combined with safety evaluation, including benchmarks such as SafeMind, SafeAgentBench, and IS-Bench, rather than treated as a replacement for it. 

A6 AI Assistants in Research or Writing 

A6.1 Information about use of AI assistants. 

AI assistants (e.g., ChatGPT/Claude) were used to polish the English grammar and refine the writing structure of the manuscript. They were not used to generate research ideas, design experiments, or produce results; all technical content, claims, and conclusions are the authors’ own and were verified by the authors.