Title: Geometric Distributional Control: Learning Progress with Partial Structural Knowledge

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.06331v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 01:20:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
# Geometric Distributional Control: Learning Progress with Partial Structural Knowledge 

Tong Wu 

University of Central Florida 

## Abstract 

Real-time control often lies between two limiting regimes. Predictive optimization and model-based control are powerful when dynamics, physical parameters, objectives, and on-line planning models are accurately specified, while reinforcement learning can avoid explicit modeling but must infer long-horizon value signals from sequential data and interaction, making training slow, high-variance, and difficult to scale in large action spaces. This middle regime appears in deployed systems such as autonomous driving, warehouse and fulfillment robotics, urban traffic-network control, and autonomous delivery drones, where partial geometry, physics, rules, or constraints are known but the local direction of task progress remains uncertain. Geometric Distributional Control (GDC) exploits this middle regime by factorizing control into feasibility and progress. Known geometry, rules, con-straints, and response maps define an executable scaffold; progress-weighted feasible data learns a Bellman-like local value-gradient that selects directions on this scaffold. This yields a value-guided controller that avoids both global Bellman recursion and black-box policy learning. The required background knowledge can be lightweight and partial, such as geom-etry, simple dynamics, safety rules, constraints, projections, or lower-level response maps; it need not specify the full system dynamics or long-horizon objective. Offline, GDC fits a progress-tilted conditional distribution from short known-feasible trajectory or optimization snippets with weak signed progress certificates. Online, its score is composed with explicit constraints, projected through the scaffold, and applied in receding-horizon feedback. We prove conditions under which the score descends a data-induced soft progress value and vali-date GDC on structured multilevel optimization and SUMO route-progress driving, where it improves over known-only solvers and learning baselines while preserving scaffold-enforced feasibility. 

## 1 Introduction 

1.1 Background and motivation 

Many deployed control systems are neither fully specified planning problems nor fully unknown black-box decision processes. They come with partial but actionable structure, such as actuator limits, local geometry, collision checks, safety rules, flow constraints, or lower-level solvers, yet still lack the value information needed to decide which feasible action best advances the task. Predictive optimization and model-based control can organize such structure into constrained planning problems when the relevant dynamics, parameters, objectives, and horizons are sufficiently specified Mayne et al. (2000); Buerger et al. (2024). Reinforcement learning offers a different route by learning value or policy information from sequential data and interaction Sutton and Barto (2018); Levine (2018), but long-horizon value estimation and exploration can be slow, high-variance, and hard to scale when actions are high-dimensional or safety constraints are strict Achiam et al. (2017); Kumar et al. (2020); Kostrikov et al. (2022). The systems motivating this paper, including autonomous driving, warehouse and fulfillment robotics, urban traffic-network control, and autonomous delivery drones, live in the gap between these two views: they have enough structure to constrain action, but not enough global knowledge to determine which feasible local action best advances the task. The missing information is closely related to the role of a Bellman value in dynamic programming and optimal control Bellman (1957); Bertsekas (2017); Bardi and Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1997). If the relevant value 1arXiv:2609.06331v1 [cs.RO] 6 Sep 2026 function were available, it would provide a principled way to rank locally feasible actions by their downstream consequences. In the partially structured settings considered here, however, that global Bellman function is not directly available: interaction effects, future constraints, objectives, or cross-level couplings may be incomplete or changing. The practical issue is therefore not only how to enforce feasibility, but how to obtain a useful value-like direction on top of feasibility. This paper treats progress, rather than the full Bellman function, as the missing learned object. We do not ask data to recover a global cost-to-go, relearn the known scaffold, or provide complete expert demonstrations. Instead, the data consist of short known-feasible trajectory or optimization segments with weak signed progress certificates. A segment may wait, yield, reverse, or reposition; it need not be a globally optimal action. Aggregating such snippets defines a progress-tilted distribution over feasible local motions, whose score acts as a local progress-value gradient in data-supported contexts. GDC implements this separation by using partial structure to anchor the support of the learned distribution. Known constraints, rules, response maps, and projections define a compact latent scaffold ̂ M∗ on which feasible behavior is represented, while score-based distributional learning Hyvärinen (2005); Song and Ermon (2020); De Bortoli et al. (2022) biases motion toward directions with lower progress energy. Online, the learned score is composed with explicit known-constraint potentials, filters, and final projections before execution. This makes feasibility easier to preserve than in a purely black-box policy interface: learning guides the direction of motion, but the known scaffold still determines what can be executed. 

1.2 Related work 

GDC is a methodology for converting feasible-progress data into an executable geometric control field. We therefore organize related work by methodological role: value, distribution, geometry, and feasibility, rather than by the application domains used for evaluation. 

Value functions, predictive control, and partial structure. Dynamic programming and optimal control use value functions to rank actions by their future consequences Bellman (1957); Bertsekas (2017); Bardi and Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1997). Model-predictive control uses a specified dynamics model, objective, and horizon to compute a local action by online constrained optimization Mayne et al. (2000); Buerger et al. (2024). GDC starts from a different information pattern: the controller has reliable partial structure that can rule out infeasible actions, but it does not have a complete model or Bellman value that ranks the remaining feasible directions. The methodological target is therefore a local progress-value gradient on a known-feasible scaffold, not a full cost-to-go or a complete online planner. 

Dataset-supported value learning. Offline reinforcement learning learns policies or value functions from fixed datasets while controlling distribution shift. Conservative and implicit value methods avoid overly optimistic extrapolation away from the dataset support Kumar et al. (2020); Kostrikov et al. (2022). GDC shares the concern that learned decisions should remain data-supported, but it weakens the learning target. The dataset need only contain known-feasible local segments with signed progress certificates; it need not contain expert rollouts or enough information to identify a reward-optimal policy. The learned object is a progress energy whose score chooses among feasible local motions, and the execution layer still enforces explicit constraints. 

Score-based distributions as control energies. Score matching and score-based generative modeling learn gradients of log densities Hyvärinen (2005); Song and Ermon (2020). In decision-making settings, diffusion models have been used as trajectory planners or expressive policy classes: Diffuser performs planning through guided denoising Janner et al. (2022), Diffusion Policy samples actions from a conditional denoising process Chi et al. (2023), and diffusion policies have also been used in offline RL or fine-tuned with policy-gradient objectives Wang et al. (2023); Zhu et al. (2023); Ren et al. (2025). GDC uses the same statistical object–a learned conditional density and its score–with a different interface to control. The distribution is not the policy to execute. Its score is interpreted as a progress-energy gradient and inserted into a structured latent vector field together with known-constraint and task potentials. 

Geometry of learned distributions. Riemannian score-based modeling extends score learning to manifold-supported distributions De Bortoli et al. (2022), while variational formulations of the Fokker– Planck equation view diffusion dynamics as Wasserstein gradient flows of free energy Jordan et al. (1998). 2Neural differential equations and physics-informed learning show complementary ways to encode continuous dynamics or physical residuals in learned models Chen et al. (2018); Raissi et al. (2019). GDC uses these geometric ideas for a control-specific purpose: partial structure defines the latent scaffold, metric, potentials, and projection maps on which the learned score is allowed to act. The geometry is not only a genera-tive modeling device; it is the interface that makes the progress score composable with explicit feasibility constraints. 

Explicit feasibility layers. Safe and constrained learning methods encode safety as constraints on expected costs, state-wise conditions, or policy updates Achiam et al. (2017); Zhao et al. (2023); Wachi et al. (2024); Su et al. (2025). Runtime shields instead filter or repair actions proposed by a learned policy Carr et al. (2023); Könighofer et al. (2025). GDC follows the broader principle that feasibility should not be left entirely to a black-box policy, but changes where the constraints enter the method. Known constraints define the training support, latent scaffold, online potentials, candidate filters, and final projection. Thus feasibility is not merely a penalty or a post-hoc correction; it is the coordinate system in which the learned progress direction is represented. 

Structured solvers as known scaffolds. Differentiable optimization layers and implicit-differentiation methods expose the solution maps of specified optimization problems to learning systems Amos and Kolter (2017); Agrawal et al. (2019); Bertrand et al. (2020). These methods are most direct when the relevant optimization problem and its solution map are the object to differentiate through. GDC uses structured solvers more abstractly: a response map, projection, conservation law, or constraint checker can be part of Cknown , while the missing object remains the progress direction over the resulting feasible scaffold. This keeps the methodology independent of any one structured application. The resulting mathematical shift is: 

ut ∼ pθ (u | ot)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> diffusion policy: sampling = control

−→ ˙z = sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − ∇ Φknown (z) − ∇ Φtask (z)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> GDC: progress score + known constraints

. (1) The learned path therefore does not certify feasibility by itself and is not asked to rediscover the known physics from data. Its role is to rank and connect feasible local behaviors in the directions that progress certificates support. This energy view also makes the controller modular: new safety margins, task costs, resource penalties, or operator preferences can be added as potentials without retraining the progress path. 

1.3 Contributions 

We propose Geometric Distributional Control for partial-physics control problems where known constraints are reliable but the full directional solution geometry is unavailable. The main contributions are: • Feasible-progress scaffold for partial physics. GDC constructs an empirical manifold ̂ M∗ from known-feasible action segments and conditions it on observations, goals, and explicit known constraints. This replaces an unavailable analytic solution geometry with a data-supported feasible-progress geom-etry. • Progress-tilted probabilistic paths. Signed progress certificates tilt the conditional distribution of short feasible segments toward locally better behavior in expectation, without requiring every segment to improve monotonically. Diffusion-style paths are one implementation, but any differentiable path or density model that yields a score can be used. • Score-guided geometric control. The learned score is used as a progress-energy direction inside a Riemannian latent flow, combined with known-constraint potentials, candidate filtering, and final projection. Thus probability supplies direction, while explicit physics continues to define deployment-time feasibility. • Formal connection between progress data and control direction. Under a maximum-entropy demonstration model, we show that the learned score approximates the negative gradient of a data-induced soft progress value. We also derive stability, score-error robustness, non-accumulating drift, end-to-end action-error, and physics–data interpolation results. 3As supplementary validation, we instantiate the same methodology on parameterized bilevel and three-level optimization families and on SUMO route-progress driving. These experiments are used to test whether the method’s role separation–learned progress direction plus explicit known-constraint filtering–transfers across different kinds of partial structure. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the partial-physics control problem. Section 3 gives the offline and online GDC method. Section 4 states the main assumptions and guarantees. Section 5 defines the experimental instantiations and reports the current simulation results. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A reports additional SUMO diagnostics, and Appendix B contains the expanded progress-value, Riemannian-flow, stochastic, stability, and physics–data interpolation analysis.   

> Feasible segments
> (o, τ, g, r )with progress
> Reliable horizon
> select H⋆
> from certificates
> Latent scaffold
> qξ, D ψ
> and

# ̂ M      

> Progress score
> learn pZθ
> and sθ
> Offline fit Online control Observe
> context ( ot, g )known limits
> Compose energy
> progress score plus barriers
> Decode candidates
> sample/filter/rank
> Project and act
> enforce Cknown
> execute ut
> Known scaffold: Cknown supplies barriers, anchors, checks, projection, and fallback.

Figure 1: Overview of GDC. Known-feasible segments with weak progress certificates are used offline to build a latent feasible-progress geometry and score field. Online control follows the induced progress-energy direction, while the explicit known scaffold remains responsible for filtering, projection, fallback, and execu-tion safety. 

## 2 Problem Formulation 

2.1 Notation 

Scalars are written in italic lowercase letters, vectors in bold lowercase letters when their component structure matters, and sets in calligraphic uppercase letters. The system state, observation, control input, and goal at time t are denoted by xt ∈ X , ot ∈ O , ut ∈ U , and g ∈ G , respectively. A short action segment is 

τt = ( ut, . . . , u t+H−1), and its signed progress certificate is ∆ ρ(τt, g ). The explicit known constraint set is 

Cknown , while Cimplicit denotes residual implicit feasibility and preference structure represented statistically from data. The selected segment horizon is H⋆(o, g, Cknown ); if no horizon has reliable positive progress, 

H⋆ = ∅ and the learned progress direction is not used. The progress-tilted empirical segment distribution at tilt parameter β is denoted by qβ (τ | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). Latent action-segment coordinates are denoted by z ∈ Z . The empirical feasible-progress map is ̂ M∗ ⊆Z, with encoder/posterior qξ (z | τ, o, g, Cknown ) and horizon-conditioned decoder Dψ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). The learned progress-tilted latent density is pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), its score is sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = 

∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), and G(z) denotes the decoder-pullback metric used for Riemannian gradients. When decoded segment or trajectory densities appear, we write pτθ ; superscripts are omitted only where the density domain is unambiguous. We write pτθ (· | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) for the segment law decoded at a latent point z and pτθ (· | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) for its marginal under pZθ (· | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). We write ∥ · ∥ for the Euclidean norm unless a metric subscript is shown. 

2.2 Problem setting and data 

Explicit and implicit physics. Consider a discrete-time dynamical system 

xt+1 = f (xt, u t), (2) 4where xt ∈ X ⊆ Rn is the system state and ut ∈ U ⊆ Rm is the control input. The controller has access to partial observations 

ot = h(xt) + εt, (3) where h : X → O is the (possibly nonlinear) observation map and εt is measurement noise. GDC assumes that some physical structure is explicit enough to be enforced online. This includes known constraints, actuator limits, geometric boundaries, conservation laws, or low-order dynamics that can be evaluated reliably. The remaining structure is treated as implicit physics : it may be unknown, but it may also be known in principle and simply too complex, coupled, high-dimensional, or expensive to model and optimize online. We write this bookkeeping distinction as 

f = fexplicit + fimplicit , C = Cknown ∩ C implicit , (4) where fexplicit and Cknown are the parts handled by explicit geometry, barriers, anchors, or filters, while 

fimplicit and Cimplicit denote residual dynamics, contact effects, cross-layer couplings, latent preferences, and feasibility patterns that are learned statistically from data. This decomposition is not required to be a physically identifiable additive split; it specifies what is enforced analytically and what is represented through the learned progress distribution. 

Feasible trajectory data with progress certificates. We assume access to offline known-feasible tra-jectories from which short segments can be extracted. After the horizon-selection procedure below, the training set is written as 

D = {(oi, u i, τ i, g i, r i)}Ni=1 , (5) where τi = ( ui,t , . . . , u i,t +Hi−1) is a selected horizon-Hi trajectory segment containing Hi controls, gi is a goal or task specification, and ri is a weak progress certificate. We do not assume that the trajectory segment reaches the final goal, nor that every segment has positive progress. Instead, each segment is known-feasible with respect to Cknown and carries a signed certificate such as 

ri = ∆ ρ(τi, g i) = ρ(xi,t +Hi , g i) − ρ(xi,t , g i), (6) for a coarse progress measure ρ. Positive ri indicates local improvement, while negative or near-zero ri may still correspond to necessary waiting, backing up, repositioning, or safety-preserving behavior. The training objective uses these certificates to bias the learned conditional distribution so that progress is positive in expectation over short trajectories under the data-supported contexts: 

Eτ ∼pD (·| o,g, Cknown )[∆ ρ(τ, g )] > 0, (7) rather than imposing monotone progress on every individual snippet. No dense reward or complete success labels are required. 

Offline horizon selection. The segment length is not fixed by hand. For each context neighborhood 

N (o, g, Cknown ) and a candidate set H = {H1, . . . , H M }, GDC chooses the shortest horizon whose progress tilt is statistically reliable. For each H ∈ H , cut all known-feasible windows τ Hi = ( ui,t , . . . , u i,t +H−1) in the neighborhood and compute rHi = ∆ ρ(τ Hi , g i) = ρ(xi,t +H , g i) − ρ(xi,t , g i). Define the clipped progress weight 

wHi = exp (β clip( rHi , −c, c )) , (8) and the weighted empirical progress ˆμH (o, g, Cknown ) = 

∑  

> i∈N (o,g, Cknown )

wHi rHi

∑  

> i∈N (o,g, Cknown )

wHi

. (9) Let ˆ σH be the corresponding weighted standard deviation, NH the number of feasible windows, and 

N eff  

> H

(o, g, Cknown ) = 

(∑  

> i∈N (o,g, Cknown )

wHi

)2

∑ 

> i∈N (o,g, Cknown )

(wHi )2 (10) 5the effective sample size of the tilted neighborhood. Candidate horizons with no feasible windows in the neighborhood are treated as inadmissible, so the lower confidence bound is evaluated only when N eff  

> H

> 0. We use 

[LCB H (o, g, Cknown ) = ˆ μH (o, g, Cknown ) − αconf 

ˆσH (o, g, Cknown )

√

N eff  

> H

(o, g, Cknown )

. (11) The selected horizon is 

H⋆(o, g, Cknown ) = min 

{

H ∈ H : [LCB H (o, g, Cknown ) > δ prog , N eff  

> H

(o, g, Cknown ) ≥ Nmin 

}

. (12) Thus H⋆ is the minimum reliable positive-progress horizon: short enough for online receding-horizon control, but long enough that the expected progress of the tilted segment distribution is positive with confidence. If the set in (12) is empty, GDC does not claim a positive-progress guarantee in that context: 

H⋆(o, g, Cknown ) = ∅. (13) Such data may still train the feasible action-segment map, because it describes what can be executed safely, but the progress tilt is disabled or downweighted for that context. Online control then falls back to the known-feasible controller or sets λ → 1 in the physics–data interpolation. This abstention rule prevents the learned path from pretending that missing data contain a reliable direction. In the notation below, when the selected horizon is context-dependent, H⋆ is treated as part of the conditioning context and is suppressed unless it matters for the algorithm. 

Control objective. The goal is to design a feedback controller ut = π(ot, g ) that produces safe, task-consistent, and directionally correct actions by leveraging both the geometric structure of ̂ M∗ and the distributional knowledge encoded in D.Formally, let C ⊂ U denote the full safety constraint set and ℓ : O × U → R a task cost. The ideal constrained feedback objective is min  

> π

E

[ T∑

> t=0

ℓ(ot, u t)

]

subject to ut ∈ C ∀t. (14) GDC addresses this by enforcing Cknown explicitly while learning a data potential whose score represents the implicit physics, coupled feasibility patterns, and goal-conditioned progress information captured by feasible trajectory demonstrations with progress certificates. Consequently, the hard execution guarantee is stated for Cknown ; membership in Cimplicit is a data-supported statistical property rather than an analytic certificate outside the modeled support. 

## 3 Geometric Distributional Control Method 

3.1 Overview and offline construction 

GDC has an offline construction stage and an online navigation stage. The term Geometric Distributional Control refers to the complete framework, while GDC online control refers to the frozen feedback controller deployed after offline learning. The two stages are: 

Stage Inputs Outputs / actions 

Offline learning Known-feasible trajectories, progress certificates, goals, observations, and 

Cknown 

Horizon selector H⋆, posterior model 

qξ (z | τ, o, g, Cknown ), decoder Dψ or likelihood pψ , progress path pZθ (z |

o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), and score sθ

Online control Current observation ot, goal g, known constraints Cknown , and fixed offline models Evaluate H⋆t , sample/refine latent candidates z, decode candidate action segments, filter by known constraints, execute the first action ut

6No model is retrained online. If the selected horizon is unavailable in the current context, GDC abstains from using the progress guarantee and falls back to the known-feasible controller or increases the known-physics weight ( λ → 1). The offline stage has one purpose: turn long feasible behavior into a compact, anchored distribution of local progress patterns. Rather than assuming complete physics or globally solved optimal trajectories, GDC starts from known-feasible trajectories and cuts them into short snippets. The known constraints define the feasible scaffold on which those snippets can live. The progress certificates then tilt a probabilistic path model toward snippets that move in locally preferable directions. The probabilistic path approximates the missing or unobserved physics statistically; the known physics remains explicit as constraints that reduce and anchor the search space. Thus the offline stage trains the objects that will later be frozen and used by the online controller. It has two logically separate components: 1. Feasible action-segment embedding: an encoder-decoder learns a compact latent coordinate system ̂

M∗ for known-feasible action segments. 2. Progress density learning: a progress-tilted probabilistic path learns how short feasible snippets tend to move on ̂ M∗ and supplies the score used online. Diffusion is therefore not the method itself and not a second encoder path. It is one possible gradual implementation of the probabilistic path. 

Progress-tilted target distribution. For contexts with H⋆(o, g, Cknown )̸ = ∅, let qH⋆ 

> D

(τ | o, g, Cknown )denote the empirical distribution of known-feasible snippets at the selected horizon. A signed progress certificate r = ∆ ρ(τ, g ) defines the progress-tilted distribution 

qβ (τ | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = 1

Zβ (o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) qH⋆ 

> D

(τ | o, g, Cknown ) exp( β clip(∆ ρ(τ, g ), −c, c )) , (15) restricted to snippets satisfying the known constraints. Thus the learned path is constraint-aware because its training support and conditioning variables include Cknown , but it is not itself a certificate of hard feasibility outside the empirical support. This is a soft tilt, not a hard filter. Positive-progress snippets receive larger likelihood, but temporarily regressive snippets may remain when they represent waiting, yielding, backing up, or reorientation. The target is not “every snippet improves.” The target is that the learned conditional distribution has positive expected progress in the data-supported region where (12) succeeds. With ˜ r(τ, g ) = clip(∆ ρ(τ, g ), −c, c ), 

Eτ ∼qβ [˜ r(τ, g )] = ∂∂β log Zβ (o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). (16) Thus the assumption (7) is used only after the horizon test: the offline data already moves in a locally preferable direction in expectation under the known-feasible context and selected horizon, and the exponential tilt amplifies this bias without deleting necessary non-progressing maneuvers. Equivalently, for β ≥ 0, the training target places more probability mass on larger progress certificates while remaining restricted to 

Cknown .

Feasible action-segment embedding. The latent action-segment representation is essential for scalabil-ity. Directly modeling or searching over a horizon-H action segment lives in a space of dimension Hd u, which can be prohibitive for multi-level systems, power networks, or autonomous driving. GDC instead learns a low-dimensional latent variable z ∈ Z with dz ≪ Hd u, and trains the probabilistic path on the latent distri-bution induced by feasible-progress snippets through this encoder. The online controller therefore samples and refines z, then decodes z into an executable action segment. When the known physics has geometric coordinates, this latent space can be realized as 

Z = Rd0 × G1 × · · · × GL, (17) 7where the Euclidean factors capture unconstrained latent variation and the Lie group factors capture known geometric degrees of freedom such as pose, phase, orientation, or network-flow coordinates. This prod-uct/geometric structure is optional; the compact latent action-segment map is not. The essential scaffold is the known-feasible set ̂ M∗

> known

(o, g ) inside this learned low-dimensional search space. GDC does not need a distillation loss from a complete solution map. The offline object being embedded is already the behavior segment that will be controlled online: a known-feasible short action trajectory. Since no ground-truth latent code is observed, we learn the latent scaffold with a regularized variational action-segment autoencoder, where Hk is the selected horizon of the training segment τk:

qξ (z | τk, o k, g k, Cknown ), pψ (τk | z, o k, g k, Cknown , H k). (18) For notation, a latent code can be sampled from the encoder or set to its posterior mean: 

zk ∼ qξ (· | τk, o k, g k, Cknown ), ¯zk = Eqξ [z | τk, o k, g k, Cknown ]. (19) When deterministic notation is convenient, we write Eξ (τk, o k, g k, Cknown ) = ¯ zk only as shorthand for this posterior mean; the learned encoder itself is the variational distribution qξ . The decoder distribution recon-structs an executable short action segment: ˆτk = Dψ (zk, o k, g k, Cknown , H k) or equivalently ˆτk ∼ pψ (· | zk, o k, g k, Cknown , H k), (20) The first action of the decoded segment is the executable control. State reconstruction is not a primary objective; states enter only through the observation, the known constraints, and the progress certificate used to label the segment. 

Structured offline objective. The feasible map is trained with only the losses needed to make the action-segment coordinates smooth, executable, and known-feasible: 

Lmap = Lvae + λkLknown (21) Here Lvae = Ek

[Ez∼qξ (·| τk ,o k ,g k ,Cknown ) [− log pψ (τk | z, o k, g k, Cknown , H k)] +βz KL( qξ (z | τk, o k, g k, Cknown ) ∥ p0(z))] , (22) where p0(z) is a simple prior such as N (0 , I ), or a structured prior when the latent coordinates include known geometric factors. The known-constraint loss penalizes decoded action segments that violate Cknown :

Lknown = EkEz∼qξ (·| τk ,o k ,g k ,Cknown )

[∑

> r

[f known  

> r

(Dψ (z, o k, g k, Cknown , H k), o k, g k)+

]2

]

. (23) The KL term and the low-dimensional bottleneck prevent the encoder from becoming an identity map and make the latent space suitable for sampling. Additional smoothness or contrastive regularizers may be added, but they are not progress losses. After minimizing (21), the empirical manifold ̂ M∗ is the data-supported region of the latent space reached by known-feasible action segments. We separate Lmap from the path objective because they answer different questions. The map loss learns only the coordinate system for known-feasible action segments. It does not upweight positive progress or enforce positive expected progress. The path loss then learns a conditional density on that scaffold: where progress-biased feasible behavior has probability mass, and therefore which direction the controller should move online. Conceptually GDC first learns the feasible action-segment map and then learns the progress-tilted probability path over that map. 

Progress-tilted probabilistic path. After the map exists, GDC fits a progress-tilted probabilistic path over the latent codes on ̂ M∗. This path learns the recurring local movement patterns inside the segmented feasible trajectories: how one known-feasible local behavior tends to transition toward another under the 8same goal and constraint context. These patterns are the statistical approximation of the missing physics and cross-level couplings that were not included in Cknown . The known physics does not merely appear as a conditioning variable; it shrinks and anchors the path. Define the known-feasible latent scaffold ̂

M∗

> known

(o, g ) = 

{

z ∈̂ M∗ : f known  

> r

(Dψ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), o, g ) ≤ 0, r = 1 , . . . , R 

}

. (24) The probability path is learned on, and sampled back toward, this anchored scaffold: 

pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) is supported or strongly concentrated on ̂ M∗

> known

(o, g ). (25) Thus the path is not asked to rediscover the known physics from data or explore the full trajectory space. The known constraints act as fixed anchors that hold the distribution to the feasible scaffold, while the progress tilt learns how feasible short segments move across the parts of the system whose physics is missing or only partially observed. A diffusion-style path is one implementation: it gradually approximates the clean feasible-progress distri-bution by moving along a sequence of corrupted distributions. For a path step ℓ and a clean latent point 

zk ∼ qξ (· | τk, o k, g k, Cknown ), 

zk,ℓ = √¯αℓ zk + √1 − ¯αℓ ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ). (26) Following recent direct clean-data prediction views of generative path models, the network predicts the clean latent behavior rather than the injected perturbation. Let ˆz0,k = Fθ (zk,ℓ , o k, g k, Cknown , H k, ℓ ), ˆτ0,k = Dψ (ˆ z0,k , o k, g k, Cknown , H k), ˆu0,k = [ˆ τ0,k ]0. (27) The progress-weighted clean-behavior prediction objective is anchored by the known constraints: 

Lpath = Ek,ℓ,ϵ [wk Bk] , wk = exp( β clip( rk, −c, c )) . (28) where 

Bk = ∥ˆz0,k − zk∥2 + λτ ∥Dψ (ˆ z0,k , o k, g k, Cknown , H k) − τk∥2

+ λanc Aknown (ˆ z0,k , ˆu0,k , ˆτ0,k ). (29) The anchor penalty is 

Aknown (ˆ z, ˆu, ˆτ ) = ∑

> r

[f known  

> r

(ˆ u, o, g )+

]2 + ∑

> t

∑

> r

[f known  

> r

(ˆ τt, o, g )+

]2 . (30) The weighted objective is the empirical implementation of the tilted target (15). Let qZβ denote the progress-weighted aggregate posterior induced by the variational encoder: 

qZβ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = 

∫

qξ (z | τ, o, g, Cknown ) qβ (τ | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) d τ. (31) Minimizing (28) fits the latent path density pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) to this tilted latent distribution, subject to the known anchors (24)–(30). Let pτθ denote the decoded segment distribution induced by z ∼ pZθ (· | 

o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) and τ = Dψ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). Hence the data moment (7) appears online, only when 

H⋆̸ = ∅, as the progress-bias property 

Eτ ∼pτθ (·| o,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] ≈ Eτ ∼qβ (·| o,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] > 0 (32) inside the data-supported known-feasible region. The approximation error is the density fitting error of the probabilistic path model plus decoder error from the latent map. This objective gives larger density to latent regions associated with positive signed progress while retaining feasible waiting, yielding, or repositioning snippets when they are present in the data. The result is a conditional latent density pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)and score sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = ∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) on the learned map. This score is the online progress direction used by GDC. 9Offline output. The offline stage returns the action-segment posterior model qξ (z | τ, o, g, Cknown ), the decoder Dψ (or likelihood pψ ), the clean latent predictor Fθ , and the conditional path score 

sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). The empirical manifold ̂ M∗ is the data-supported, known-feasible region of the action-segment map, equipped with a progress-tilted path density. 

3.2 Geometry and progress score 

Definition 3.1 (Pullback metric on ̂ M∗). The Riemannian metric on ̂ M∗ is the decoder-pullback metric: 

G(z) = JD (z)⊤JD (z) + λmI, (33) 

where JD is the Jacobian of the action-segment decoder, for example D(z) = Dψ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), and 

λm > 0 ensures positive definiteness. 

For a smooth function Φ : ̂ M∗ → R, the Riemannian gradient is grad G Φ( z) = G(z)−1∇z Φ( z), (34) and the Riemannian gradient flow is ˙z = − grad G Φ( z) = −G(z)−1∇z Φ( z). (35) 

Proposition 3.2 (Invariance) . The Riemannian gradient flow (35) is invariant under diffeomorphic repa-rameterizations of ̂ M∗.Proof. Let φ : ˜M → ̂ M∗ be a C1 diffeomorphism and write z = φ(˜ z). The pullback metric is ˜G(˜ z) = 

Jφ(˜ z)⊤G(z)Jφ(˜ z) and the pulled-back potential is ˜Φ(˜ z) = Φ( φ(˜ z)). By the chain rule, ∇˜z ˜Φ = J⊤ 

> φ

∇z Φ. The gradient vector field in the ˜ z coordinates is the unique vector ˜X satisfying ˜G( ˜X, ˜v) = d ˜Φ[ ˜v] for every tangent vector ˜v. Substituting the definitions gives Jφ ˜X = G−1∇z Φ = grad G Φ. Therefore the pushed-forward flow obeys ddt φ(˜ zt) = Jφ ˙˜zt = − grad G Φ( zt), which is exactly (35) in the original coordinates. 

Offline progress-path implementation and score extraction. This subsection specifies one offline implementation of the progress-tilted latent path. After training, the online controller treats qξ , Dψ , H⋆,and pZθ as fixed. The learned object is the progress-tilted latent path density pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆); the online score sθ = ∇z log pZθ is derived from this density. Known physics is not left implicit in the data distribution: it appears as constraints, barriers, anchors, and filters. The path density approximates what is missing from the explicit model: implicit physics, latent preference structure, cross-level coupling, and long-horizon directional information. 

Diffusion-style gradual path instantiation. Let z0 ∼ qdata (z) denote a latent behavior sampled from the data distribution on ̂ M∗. A convenient implementation is a diffusion-style gradual path: one moves from clean feasible-progress behaviors to corrupted latent points and learns to predict the clean behavior back. This is not required by GDC; any differentiable conditional density or path model that yields ∇z log pZθ can be used. For the diffusion-style implementation, the forward path adds noise within the tangent bundle 

T̂ M∗:

q(zℓ | zℓ−1) = N̂M∗

(

zℓ; √1 − βℓ zℓ−1, β ℓG(zℓ−1)−1)

, (36) where N̂M∗ denotes the Riemannian normal distribution on ̂ M∗, and G(z)−1 ensures noise is scaled according to the local geometry. In practice, when ̂ M∗ is approximately flat at the scale of the noise (which holds for well-trained manifolds with sufficient latent dimension), we use the Euclidean approximation: 

q(zℓ | zℓ−1) ≈ N 

(

zℓ; √1 − βℓ zℓ−1, β ℓI

)

, (37) with {βℓ}Tℓ=1 a noise schedule, αℓ = 1 − βℓ, and ¯ αℓ = ∏ℓj=1 αj . The marginal is 

q(zℓ | z0) = N (zℓ; √¯αℓ z0, (1 − ¯αℓ)I) . (38) 10 Clean latent predictor fixed after offline training. The probabilistic path is a model of what action or short action trajectory should be executed next , conditioned on the current observation, goal, and known con-straints. It is not primarily a next-state predictor, and it does not directly predict the full high-dimensional action segment as its core output. The path network predicts the clean latent behavior, and the fixed decoder 

Dψ maps that latent point to the executable action segment. This choice follows the clean-data prediction principle advocated by Li and He Li and He (2026): clean data lie on the low-dimensional data manifold, while corrupted quantities generally do not. In GDC, this means predicting clean latent action-segment codes, not merely a latent perturbation residual and not a full action sequence in ambient dimension: ˆz0 = Fθ (zℓ, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆, ℓ ), ˆτ0 = Dψ (ˆ z0, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), ˆu0 = [ˆ τ0]0. (39) Offline training uses this clean latent target to implement the path objective (28): for a corrupted latent point zℓ = √¯αℓz0 + √1 − ¯αℓϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), the model predicts z0 and weights the latent prediction by the progress tilt induced by the signed certificate. A decoded trajectory loss through Dψ may be used as a consistency term, but direct action prediction is not the core path model. State quantities are not part of the core path loss; when available, they are used only to evaluate known dynamics, check constraints, or compute progress certificates. During online control Fθ and Dψ are fixed; the clean predictor may be queried to estimate the path score, but it does not replace the online latent control dynamics. 

Remark 3.3 (Known constraints versus learned feasibility) . Since every training sample z0 lies on ̂ M∗ and is filtered or penalized by Cknown , the learned path concentrates its density on the data-supported progress-biased region. This does not prove feasibility for all implicit physics; rather, it makes implicit feasibility a statistical property of feasible trajectory demonstrations with progress certificates. Known constraints are still enforced explicitly through conditioning, barrier terms, anchor penalties, and candidate filtering during control. 

Score induced by clean behavior prediction. Although the network predicts clean behavior directly, it still induces a score field for online control. For the diffusion-style gradual path, under the Gaussian forward kernel zℓ = √¯αℓz0 + √1 − ¯αℓϵ, replacing z0 by its clean prediction gives the score approximation 

sdiff  

> θ,ℓ

(zℓ, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) ≈√¯αℓ Fθ (zℓ, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆, ℓ ) − zℓ

1 − ¯αℓ

. (40) Thus GDC can use direct action/trajectory prediction during training while still obtaining the score direction needed for Riemannian gradient-flow control. 

3.3 Online progress-energy navigation 

At deployment, all learned objects are frozen. GDC receives the action-segment posterior qξ , decoder Dψ ,horizon selector H⋆, progress-tilted latent density pZθ , and score sθ = ∇z log pZθ . The online stage is therefore not another learning or diffusion-sampling procedure. It is a geometric navigator on the learned feasible-progress map: the controller localizes the current context, forms a composable latent energy, follows its induced vector field for a fixed number of small steps, decodes an action segment, and applies the final known-constraint projection before executing the first action. This is the GDC analogue of Pareto-map navigation in GPC. The difference is the source of the tangential direction. In GPC, the tangential energy comes from a known Pareto solution map and semantic priority coordinate. In GDC, no complete Pareto or physics solution map is available; the tangential data energy is instead induced by the progress-tilted probabilistic path learned from feasible-progress segments. Thus the learned distribution is not executed as a policy. It becomes an energy term that can be combined with known physics, task costs, safety margins, and fallback logic. 

Context-consistent latent localization. At time t, the controller observes ot and evaluates H⋆t =

H⋆(ot, g, Cknown ). If H⋆t = ∅, the progress guarantee is not invoked and the controller falls back to a known-feasible backup. Otherwise, GDC constructs a local data-supported candidate set 

Mt =

{

z ∈̂ M∗ : H⋆t̸ = ∅, D ψ (z, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) is locally known-feasible 

}

. (41) 11 In implementation, Mt is represented by warm-starts from the previous accepted latent state, samples from 

pZθ (· | ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ), or nearby latent codes whose decoded segments pass the known-constraint filter. This plays the role of manifold localization: it anchors online navigation to the part of the learned map that is consistent with the current observation and known constraints. 

Online energy and nominal vector field. The direction of online motion is determined by the composite latent energy Φon ,t (z) = 1

ϵs

Φscaf (z; ot, Cknown ) + λΦknown (z; ot, Cknown ) + (1 − λ)Φ data (z; ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) + Φ task (z; ot, g ),

(42) where Φ scaf is a fast restoration term that keeps z near Mt, Φ known contains available physics and explicit constraints, Φ task encodes the runtime objective, and Φdata (z; ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) = − log pZθ (z | ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) (43) is the progress energy learned offline. The nominal vector field is the Riemannian descent flow 

Ft(z) := ˙ z = − grad G Φon ,t (z)= −G(z)−1

[ 1

ϵs

∇z Φscaf (z) + λ∇z Φknown (z) − (1 − λ)sθ (z, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) + ∇z Φtask (z)

]

. (44) The scalar ϵs induces the same snap-then-slide structure as a geometric navigator: the scaffold term rapidly restores the latent state to the known-feasible support, while the data and task terms move tangentially toward progress. The learned path can therefore be kept fixed while new physics, safety, preference, or resource terms are added to the energy. 

Geometry-aware latent evolution. Given Ft, GDC advances each candidate latent state with a fixed-depth integrator rather than an online nonlinear optimizer. A simple second-order implementation is 

k1 = Π ∥·∥ G≤Vmax Ft(zn), (45) 

zmid = zn + ∆t 

> 2

k1, (46) 

k2 = Π ∥·∥ G≤Vmax Ft(zmid ), (47) ∆zn = ∆ t k 2, (48) where Π ∥·∥ G≤Vmax caps the latent velocity in the decoder-pullback metric. The increment is then integrated in the latent chart or product geometry: ¯zn+1 = zn ⊕ ∆zn, (49) where ⊕ is ordinary addition in a flat latent chart and the corresponding group or retraction update when structured latent factors are used. Finally, the integrated point is accepted only after a scaffold correction: 

zn+1 = (1 − μR)¯ zn+1 + μR ΠMt (¯ zn+1 ), (50) with μR ∈ [0 , 1]. In the common case where ¯ zn+1 already decodes to a known-feasible segment, Π Mt is the identity. Otherwise it is implemented by the simplest problem-specific retraction, clipping, or backtracking rule. Thus the bridge from the differential law to decoding is explicit: ˙z −→ ∆zn −→ ¯zn+1 −→ zn+1 ∈ M t −→ Dψ (zn+1 , o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ).

The velocity cap and retraction are not optimizers; they are numerical guards that keep the online state in the region where the decoder and score are trusted. 

Decode, project, and execute. After Nr latent evolution steps, each candidate has an accepted post-navigation latent state z(k) 

> t, nav

:= z(k) 

> Nr

∈ M t. This is the latent point that is decoded: 

τ (k) 

> t

= Dψ (z(k)

> t, nav

, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ). (51) 12 GDC selects a feasible-progress candidate using the task score Jsel and takes the first decoded action unom  

> t

=

τ nom  

> t, 0

. The final executed action is the weighted projection onto the current known-feasible action set: 

ut = Π W

> Uknown (ot,u t−1)

(unom  

> t

) := arg min 

> u∈U known (ot,u t−1)

12 ∥u − unom  

> t

∥2 

> W

. (52) For box constraints this is clipping; for equality constraints it has the standard weighted-projection closed form. If no decoded candidate or final projection is feasible, the controller resamples or uses the known-feasible backup. The projection is only the last execution guard: the main online controller is the energy-induced latent navigation in (44). 

Algorithm 1 GDC online progress-energy navigation  

> 1:

Input: current observation ot, goal g, previous action ut−1, frozen models ( qξ , D ψ , H ⋆, p Zθ , s θ ), known-constraint checker, projection layer, and selection cost Jsel . 

> 2:

Output: executable action ut. 

> 3:

Evaluate H⋆t = H⋆(ot, g, Cknown ). If H⋆t = ∅, return the known-feasible fallback action.  

> 4:

Build or warm-start K candidates z(1: K)0 in the local known-feasible latent set Mt. 

> 5:

Form Φ on ,t and its Riemannian vector field Ft = − grad G Φon ,t . 

> 6:

for k = 1 , . . . , K do  

> 7:

Take Nr capped RK2/retraction steps using Eqs. (48)–(50).  

> 8:

Decode τ (k) 

> t

= Dψ (z(k) 

> Nr

, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) and discard candidates that violate Cknown . 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

If no decoded candidate is feasible, return the known-feasible fallback action.  

> 11:

Select a feasible segment minimizing Jsel (τ, o t, g ) and set unom  

> t

to its first action.  

> 12:

Project ut = Π W

> Uknown (ot,u t−1)

(unom  

> t

); if projection fails, return the known-feasible fallback action.  

> 13:

Execute ut and replan at the next observation. 

The dominant online cost is fixed-depth navigation: O(KN r (Cθ + Cknown ) + Cproj ). No model is retrained online and no full nonlinear planning problem is solved. The repeated online operation is evaluating the frozen score/energy, integrating a bounded latent vector field, decoding candidate action segments, and applying the final known-constraint projection. 

## 4 Formal Assumptions and Main Guarantees 

This section states the main conditions under which GDC turns feasible-progress data into a usable online controller. The expanded derivations are given in Appendix B; here we state only the assumptions and the guarantees they yield. 

Assumption 4.1 (Data-supported feasible-progress scaffold) . For each context (o, g, Cknown ) in the modeled operating envelope, the offline dataset contains known-feasible action segments whose decoded support lies within the explicit known-constraint scaffold. When the horizon selector returns H⋆(o, g, Cknown )̸ = ∅, the progress-tilted conditional distribution has positive expected signed progress: 

Eτ ∼qβ (·| o,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] > 0. (53) 

If this condition cannot be certified from data, GDC abstains from using the learned progress direction and falls back to the known-feasible controller. 

Assumption 4.2 (Regular latent map and explicit execution guard) . The decoder Dψ is Lipschitz on the data-supported neighborhood of ̂ M∗, the known-constraint functions are locally Lipschitz after decoding, and the online controller uses bounded latent velocity, scaffold retraction or backtracking, decoded candidate filtering, and a final projection onto the current known-feasible action set Uknown (ot, u t−1). This set is closed and nonempty whenever the projection layer is invoked, and the fallback action belongs to it. 

Theorem 4.3 (Progress score as an implicit value gradient) . Under Assumption 4.1 and a maximum-entropy model of feasible progress demonstrations, suppose the continuation partition function is finite, positive, and 

C1 in z on the selected data-supported neighborhood, and that it induces p⋆(z | c) ∝ ZH (z, c ) with respect to the chosen latent reference measure for the selected context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). If the learned latent path 

13 satisfies ∥∇ z log pZθ − ∇ z log p⋆∥ ≤ εapprox on the data-supported neighborhood, then the progress-tilted path density defines a data-induced soft progress value V soft prog on ̂ M∗ such that 

sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = ∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = −∇ z V soft prog (z, c ) + O(εapprox ), (54) 

where εapprox is the path-model approximation error. Proof. Fix a context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) for which the horizon selector does not abstain. Under the maximum-entropy demonstration model, feasible future segments starting from latent point z have an unnor-malized partition function ZH (z, c ) = ∫ exp[ −CH (τ ; c)] d νz (τ ) over known-feasible continuations, with soft progress value V soft prog (z, c ) = − log ZH (z, c ). The model posits that the induced ideal latent density is propor-tional to this partition function: p⋆(z | c) = Z−1 

> c

exp[ −V soft prog (z, c )]. Hence ∇z log p⋆(z | c) = −∇ z V soft prog (z, c ). If the learned path satisfies ∥∇ z log pZθ − ∇ z log p⋆∥ ≤ εapprox on the data-supported neighborhood, then (54) follows. Appendix B.2 gives the full regularized statement. Theorem 4.3 is the central directional guarantee. It says that the score is not merely a sampling vector field: after progress-tilted training, it is a descent direction for the progress value represented by the data policy. Thus the learned distribution can choose among locally known-feasible options whose explicit constraints alone do not determine a direction. 

Proposition 4.4 (Known-feasible online execution) . Under Assumption 4.2, every action executed by Al-gorithm 1 belongs to the current known-feasible action set whenever the projection layer is available: 

ut ∈ U known (ot, u t−1). (55) 

If no decoded candidate or projected action is feasible, the controller resamples or uses the known-feasible fallback. Proof. Algorithm 1 decodes only candidate segments that pass the known-constraint filter. Its final executed command is ut = Π W

> Uknown (ot,u t−1)

(unom  

> t

) whenever the projection exists. By definition of projection onto a nonempty closed known-feasible set, the projected point belongs to Uknown (ot, u t−1). If the projection layer is unavailable or fails, or if no candidate survives filtering, the algorithm returns the known-feasible fallback required by Assumption 4.2. Therefore every executed non-fallback or fallback action lies in the current known-feasible action set. 

Corollary 4.5 (Non-accumulating GDC action error) . Suppose the ideal progress value is locally strongly geodesically convex near a target latent point with modulus m, the learned score error is bounded by ε,and the decoder has Lipschitz constant KDψ and error δdec . Under the bounded-drift implementation of Assumption 4.2, with scaffold-restoration timescale ϵs > 0, latent-velocity cap Vmax , and latent integration step ∆t as defined for the online controller in Section 3.3 (full statement and proof: Theorem B.23 in Appendix B.7), the asymptotic executed action error satisfies 

lim sup 

> t→∞

∥ut − u⋆t ∥ ≤ KDψ

(√ ϵs

2 Vmax ∆t + εm

)

+ δdec . (56) 

The same bound holds pointwise for any receding-horizon update whose local refinement has reached the ε/m 

robustness tube. The three terms correspond to geometric integration drift, score approximation error, and decoder error; none grows with the rollout horizon. Proof. Let z⋆t denote the ideal in-scaffold latent action segment and let ¯ zt be the in-scaffold point reached by the local refinement. The perturbed-gradient result in Theorem B.21 gives lim sup t→∞ dG(¯ zt, z ⋆t ) ≤ ε/m . The bounded-drift/retraction guard in Assumption 4.2 keeps the accepted latent point zt within √ϵs/2Vmax ∆t of ¯zt in the local metric. Thus, by the triangle inequality and the same limsup bound, lim sup t→∞ dG(zt, z ⋆t ) ≤√ϵs/2Vmax ∆t + ε/m . Applying the KDψ -Lipschitz decoder to the first decoded action and adding the offline decoder error δdec gives (56); the final projection onto the convex known-feasible set is non-expansive and fixes the feasible ideal action, so it does not enlarge the bound. For any particular receding-horizon update already satisfying dG(¯ zt, z ⋆t ) ≤ ε/m , the identical triangle-inequality argument gives the pointwise version. The estimate does not sum over the rollout length. 14 Theorem 4.6 (Approximate optimality) . Fix a selected context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) and a compact geodesi-cally convex data-supported region Uc ⊂̂ M∗. Let Φopt (·, c ) denote the oracle constrained horizon objective on Uc, and let z⋆ = arg min z∈Uc Φopt (z, c ) be its unique minimizer. Suppose the learned GDC potential approximates the oracle objective up to the context-dependent normalizing constant a(c):

sup 

> z∈Uc

|ΦGDC (z, c ) − Φopt (z, c ) − a(c)| ≤ αval , (57) 

and suppose the online refinement returns ˆz ∈ Uc satisfying 

ΦGDC (ˆ z, c ) ≤ inf 

> z∈Uc

ΦGDC (z, c ) + ηopt . (58) 

If Φopt is m-strongly geodesically convex on Uc, then 

Φopt (ˆ z, c ) − Φopt (z⋆, c ) ≤ 2αval + ηopt , dG(ˆ z, z ⋆) ≤

√ 2(2 αval + ηopt )

m . (59) 

Consequently, with a KDψ -Lipschitz decoder, decoder error δdec , and final projection perturbation δproj , the executed first action obeys 

∥ut − u⋆t ∥ ≤ KDψ

√ 2(2 αval + ηopt )

m + δdec + δproj . (60) 

Thus, along any sequence of datasets, models, and refinement budgets for which αval , η opt , δ dec , and δproj 

vanish, GDC converges to the constrained optimal first action on the selected data-supported region. Proof. Let ̂ Φ = Φ GDC (·, c ) and Φ ⋆ = Φ opt (·, c ). By (57), Φ ⋆(ˆ z) ≤̂ Φ(ˆ z) − a(c) + αval . By (58), this is at most ̂ Φ( z⋆) − a(c) + αval + ηopt . Applying (57) again at z⋆ gives Φ ⋆(ˆ z) − Φ⋆(z⋆) ≤ 2αval + ηopt . Strong geodesic convexity gives Φ ⋆(ˆ z) − Φ⋆(z⋆) ≥ (m/ 2) dG(ˆ z, z ⋆)2, yielding the distance bound. The action bound follows from the decoder Lipschitz property, then adding the decoder reconstruction and final projection perturbation errors. Letting the four error terms go to zero proves the asymptotic statement. 

Corollary 4.7 (Coverage-controlled rate) . In the setting of Theorem 4.6, let Zn(c) ⊂ Uc be the finite latent training anchors for context c, with fill distance hn = sup z∈Uc inf ζ∈Z n(c) dG(z, ζ ). Suppose ΦGDC (·, c ) and 

Φopt (·, c ) are Lipschitz on Uc with constants Ln and Lopt , and suppose their anchor error, up to a context normalizer a(c), is at most εn:

sup 

> ζ∈Z n(c)

|ΦGDC (ζ, c ) − Φopt (ζ, c ) − a(c)| ≤ εn.

Then Theorem 4.6 holds with 

αval ≤ εn + ( Ln + Lopt )hn.

Consequently, if the online refinement error after K refinement steps is ηK , the oracle gap is 

Φopt (ˆ z, c ) − Φopt (z⋆, c ) = O(εn + hn + ηK ),

and the executed first-action error is 

∥ut − u⋆t ∥ = O

(√ εn + hn + ηK + δdec + δproj 

)

.

For example, quasi-uniform coverage on a d-dimensional region gives hn = O(n−1/d ), while iid coverage with density bounded below gives hn = Op((log n/n )1/d ); the covering argument is given in Corollary B.26. Proof. For any z ∈ Uc, choose ζ ∈ Z n(c) with dG(z, ζ ) ≤ hn. The triangle inequality and Lipschitz bounds give 

|ΦGDC (z, c ) − Φopt (z, c ) − a(c)| ≤ εn + ( Ln + Lopt )hn.

Substituting this bound for αval in Theorem 4.6 gives the value-gap and action-error rates. 15 Remark 4.8 (Physics–data interpolation) . For λ ∈ [0 , 1] , the online potential 

Φλ(z) = λΦknown (z) + (1 − λ)Φ data (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + Φ task (z) (61) 

is affine in λ, so it interpolates continuously between known-physics control ( λ = 1 , leaving Φknown + Φ task )and data-driven progress completion ( λ = 0 , leaving Φdata + Φ task ). The support restriction, anchors, filters, and final projection are those of the known scaffold at every λ, so intermediate values simply blend the two vector-field contributions. When data support is sparse or the horizon selector abstains, setting λ → 1

removes Φdata from the descent law and recovers the known-feasible controller. 

These statements are intentionally conditional. GDC does not claim global optimality or implicit feasibility outside the data-supported scaffold. Approximate optimality requires the stronger value-consistency condi-tion in Theorem 4.6. Without that condition, the guarantee is narrower and operational: known physics enforces what can be executed, while progress-tilted feasible data supplies a local direction where the horizon selector certifies positive expected progress. 

## 5 Experimental Validation 

We instantiate GDC in two domains with different meanings of partial structural knowledge. In SUMO, the known structure consists of explicit traffic and actuator constraints, while route-directed behavior is learned from weak driving traces. In the bilevel problem, the known structure consists of the nested problem form, analytic objectives and gradients, feasibility projection, and local relaxation updates, while useful joint motion across the levels is learned from solver traces. Each domain is evaluated on its own numerical benchmark: the multilevel problems test whether the learned progress field supplies fast cross-level directions beyond a known local scaffold, and the SUMO routes test whether the same principle improves closed-loop route progress while explicit traffic constraints remain enforced online. 

5.1 Application I: Route-progress control in SUMO 

Task and known scaffold 

SUMO gives a concrete partial-physics instance of GDC Lopez et al. (2018); Krajzewicz et al. (2012). The ego vehicle must complete a sampled route through a traffic network, but the controller is not treated as an end-to-end perception system. SUMO provides localization, lane, leader-vehicle, and traffic-light signals; explicit rules check speed, acceleration, headway, lane-change, and collision constraints. The missing component is the local direction of route progress: among actions that satisfy these known tests, the controller must decide which one advances the route without relying on a full online optimal-control solve. At each control step the controller observes 

ot = ( pxt , p yt , v t, sin ψt, cos ψt, ℓ t, s t, L t, v max  

> t

, ι t, N route  

> t

, d t, g lead  

> t

, ∆vlead  

> t

, c tls  

> t

, c col  

> t

, c arr  

> t

) ∈ R17 , (62) where dt is the remaining route distance. The action ut = ( at, q t) contains a longitudinal acceleration and a lane-change command qt ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}. After executing one action in SUMO, the controller receives a new observation and replans. The known-feasible filter checks 

−amax dec ≤ at ≤ amax acc , 0 ≤ vt + ∆ tenv at ≤ vmax  

> t

+ εv , (63) 

qt ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}, |qt − qt−1| ≤ ∆qmax , (64) 

glead  

> t

≥ gmin + Thvt, ccol  

> t

= 0 . (65) We use amax acc = 2 .0 m /s2, amax dec = 4 .5 m /s2, gmin = 2 .5 m, Th = 0 .8 s, and environment control period ∆tenv = 0 .5 s (distinct from the latent integration step ∆ t of the online navigator). These constraints determine what may be executed, but they do not select among feasible route choices. A conservative fallback segment is constructed from this same scaffold by tracking a target speed, braking for near leaders or restrictive signals, and avoiding discretionary lane changes. The fallback is a feasible anchor and a last-resort action source; it is not the learned policy. 16 Progress data and online decision rule 

Offline rollouts come from a deliberately weak and diverse behavior policy with randomized acceleration, braking, coasting, exploration, and lane changes. It observes traffic-light state and slows at red or yellow signals, but is neither expert nor globally optimal. The data therefore include progress, waiting, braking, and imperfect local maneuvers. GDC does not treat these traces as expert labels. It uses them to learn which feasible segments tend to reduce remaining route distance. Each rollout is divided into action segments 

τt = ( ut, u t+1 , . . . , u t+H−1). (66) Each segment receives the signed certificate ∆ρSUMO (τt, g ) = dt − dt+H − κcol Ncol (τt) + κarr I{arrival in τt}. (67) The target distribution is the progress-tilted empirical distribution 

qSUMO  

> β

(τ | o, g, Cknown ) ∝ qSUMO  

> D

(τ | o, g, Cknown ) exp( β clip(∆ ρSUMO (τ, g ), −c, c )) . (68) At test time, GDC samples or initializes candidate segments near the fallback and near data-supported local motions, refines them with the learned score, decodes τt(z) = Dψ (z, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ), filters them with (65), and ranks the remaining candidates by 

Jt(z) = wE Φdata (z, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) − wP̂ ∆ρSUMO (τt(z), g ) + wU ∥τt(z)∥2 + wC VCknown (τt(z)) + wT ∥z − zfb  

> t

∥2.

(69) Here VCknown is the aggregate violation returned by the explicit known-constraint checker, and zfb  

> t

is the latent representation of the fallback segment. Only the first action of the selected segment is executed. The next observation starts a new planning step. Thus the learned distribution is not executed open loop; it supplies a progress energy for choosing among known-feasible short motions. If no learned candidate improves sufficiently over the fallback, the controller executes the first fallback action. 

Numerical results 

The SUMO evaluation tests the same role separation in a closed-loop driving task: explicit traffic constraints decide what can be executed, while the learned progress energy chooses among feasible local motions. We train from 100 ,000 diverse weak rollouts and retain at most five million selected segments per horizon. Online evaluation uses 100 closed-loop episodes. At every control step the controller scores candidate segments, filters them with the known scaffold, executes only the first action, and replans after the next SUMO observation. 

Benchmarks. We use three increasingly difficult route-progress benchmarks, all based on perturbed 20 ×20 two-lane grids with 120 m nominal edge length and 13 .89 m /s nominal speed. The priority benchmark is the clean route-completion case. Sparse TLS adds traffic-light delay, where stopping may be the correct local action. Complex TLS is the harder-map benchmark: it keeps the graph connected but adds 18 sparse traffic lights, 64 very-low-speed detour edges at 2 .5 m /s, and 76 bottleneck edges at 7 .5 m /s on a 14 m perturbed grid. This creates routes where local progress, stopping, and longer-range route intent can conflict.                           

> Benchmark TLS Slow detour Bottleneck Removed edges Controllers
> Priority grid 0000fixed H= 12 Sparse TLS sparse 000fixed H= 12, multi-H
> Complex TLS 18 64 at 2 .5 m /s76 at 7 .5 m /s0fixed H= 12, multi-H

Table 1: SUMO route-progress benchmark suite. All maps are perturbed 20 × 20 two-lane grids. Multi-H

denotes joint online selection over H ∈ { 6, 12 , 24 }; fixed-H restricts candidate selection to H = 12. 17 Controllers and metrics. The fixed-horizon baseline and the multi-horizon controller use the same ob-servation features, weak rollout source, known-feasible filter, fallback construction, and receding-horizon first-action execution. The difference is only the online temporal support: fixed-H scores H = 12 seg-ments, while multi-H scores candidates from H ∈ { 6, 12 , 24 } in a single pool and executes the first action of the best safe segment. We report arrival rate, normalized route progress, collisions, mean and maximum known-constraint violation, non-fallback fraction, mean speed, and episode length. 

Benchmark Controller Arr. Prog. Coll. Mean viol. Max viol. Non-fb. Speed Steps 

Priority grid fixed H = 12 1.000 1.000 0.000 1.22 ×10 −6 2.80 ×10 −4 0.999 11 .24 202 .6Sparse TLS fixed H = 12 1.000 1.000 0.000 1.48 ×10 −7 5.01 ×10 −5 1.000 10 .97 230 .3Sparse TLS multi-H 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.00 0.00 0.997 10 .58 233 .9Complex TLS fixed H = 12 1.000 1.000 0.000 1.59 ×10 −5 5.88 ×10 −3 0.999 9.25 317 .3Complex TLS multi-H 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.00 0.00 0.991 8.96 322 .9

Table 2: SUMO closed-loop results over 100 episodes. Arr. is arrival rate, Prog. is normalized route progress, Coll. is mean collision count, Non-fb. is the fraction of steps where a learned candidate rather than the fallback supplies the executed action, Speed is mean speed in m /s, and Steps is mean episode length. 

Results. All reported SUMO controllers reach every route goal with zero collisions (Table 2). The priority result is the clean route-completion case: GDC achieves unit progress with only numerical-tolerance known-constraint violation. Sparse TLS reduces speed and increases episode length because stopping at signals is part of feasible progress, but both fixed-H and multi-H still complete all routes. The harder complex map is where the horizon comparison becomes meaningful. Fixed H = 12 is slightly faster, but its maximum known-constraint violation rises to 5 .88 × 10 −3. Multi-H removes this residual violation entirely, with a 0.29 m /s speed reduction and a 5 .6-step increase in mean episode length. Thus the multi-horizon benefit is not higher speed; it is safer candidate selection when the map creates conflicting short- and longer-horizon progress cues. 

Figure 2: Complex TLS multi-horizon evaluation from the fast-equivalent online implementation. The figure shows ten recorded ego paths on the harder map, selected horizons over control steps for the same episodes, the horizon-use distribution over all 100 episodes, and the dominance of the long horizon on a map with sparse traffic lights, slow bottleneck corridors, and slow detour edges. Figure 2 gives the qualitative explanation for the complex-map result. Multi-H does not vote among three independent policies. It scores all safe candidate segments together and executes the first action of the best 18 segment. The selected horizon therefore acts as an online diagnostic of temporal scale: longer horizons dominate during ordinary progress, while shorter horizons appear near local traffic or constraint-sensitive events. The fast-equivalent implementation gives the same aggregate statistics as the original multi-horizon controller, showing that this candidate-scoring step can be batched without changing the closed-loop behav-ior. 

Comparison with rule, imitation, and RL baselines. Table 3 compares GDC with a rule safety controller, the weak behavior source used for data collection, behavior cloning on the offline rollouts, and PPO/SAC baselines. The comparison uses the same sparse-TLS and complex-TLS route suites. GDC is the only method that reaches 100% arrival on both maps with zero collisions and zero mean known-constraint violation in the multi-horizon setting. On the harder complex TLS benchmark, GDC multi-H improves arrival from 91% for the rule controller, 51% for behavior cloning, 81% for PPO, and 79% for SAC to 100%, while also reducing the mean episode length relative to all non-GDC baselines.                                                                                                          

> Benchmark Method Prog. Arr. Coll. Mean viol. Speed Steps
> Sparse TLS GDC fixed-H12 1.000 1.000 0.00 1.48 ×10 −710 .97 230 .3Sparse TLS GDC multi-H 1.000 1.000 0.00 0.00 10 .58 233 .9
> Sparse TLS Rule safety 1.000 0.990 0.00 1.33 ×10 −111 .05 330 .6Sparse TLS Weak behavior 0.962 0.840 0.00 1.44 ×10 −27.86 449 .8Sparse TLS Behavior cloning 0.931 0.760 0.00 3.55 ×10 −36.26 537 .1Sparse TLS PPO 0.997 0.970 0.00 1.27 ×10 −27.87 451 .4Sparse TLS SAC 1.000 1.000 0.00 1.82 ×10 −210 .72 346 .3Complex TLS GDC fixed-H12 1.000 1.000 0.00 1.59 ×10 −59.25 317 .3
> Complex TLS GDC multi-H 1.000 1.000 0.00 0.00 8.96 322 .9Complex TLS Rule safety 0.989 0.910 0.00 1.48 ×10 −19.00 441 .2Complex TLS Weak behavior 0.841 0.550 0.00 1.44 ×10 −25.65 546 .9Complex TLS Behavior cloning 0.770 0.510 0.00 3.90 ×10 −34.74 587 .7Complex TLS PPO 0.965 0.810 0.00 1.29 ×10 −28.36 461 .7Complex TLS SAC 0.960 0.790 0.00 2.65 ×10 −28.51 436 .0

Table 3: SUMO controller benchmark comparison. GDC and non-SAC rows are evaluated over 100 episodes; the available sparse-TLS SAC run contains 90 episodes. Prog. is normalized route progress, Arr. is arrival rate, Coll. is mean collision count, Speed is mean speed in m /s, and Steps is mean episode length. 

5.2 Application II: Parameterized bilevel optimization 

Problem family and known structural knowledge 

For each parameter vector ϑ, consider a nonconvex parameterized bilevel energy over y, x ∈ Rd Colson et al. (2007); Dempe and Zemkoho (2020). The lower-level merit is a quartic-well objective 

flower ,ϑ (x; y) = 14d ∥x ⊙ x − ℓϑ(y)∥22 + μx

2d ∥x∥22 + λx

2( d − 1) 

> d−1

∑

> i=1

(xi+1 − xi)2, ℓϑ(y) = aϑ + Mϑy, (70) where Mϑ = M0 + ∑Rr=1 sr ur v⊤ 

> r

is a low-rank perturbation of a fixed banded coupling. The upper objective is also nonconvex: 

Fupper ,ϑ (y, x ) = αy

d ∥y − gy ∥22 + αx

d ∥x − gx∥22 + κy

d ∥y ⊙ y − ry ∥22 + κx

d ∥x ⊙ x − rx∥22

+ ηxy 

d ∥x − y∥22 + 1

d x⊤Cy + λy

d − 1

> d−1

∑

> i=1

(yi+1 − yi)2. (71) The parameter vector ϑ contains the goals ( gy , g x), lower shifts aϑ, well radii ( ry , r x), low-rank scales ( sr )Rr=1 ,and the ridge parameter μx. The quartic terms make both the lower and upper landscapes nonconvex, with multiple attractive basins. Each instance defines the bilevel problem min 

> y∈[−2,2] d

Fupper ,ϑ 

(y, x ⋆ϑ(y)), x⋆ϑ(y) ∈ arg min 

> x∈[−2,2] d

flower ,ϑ (x; y). (72) 19 The known structural knowledge consists of the level decomposition, analytic objectives, gradients, box projection, step-size projection, and local lower-level update; it does not include a globally certified lower response or upper optimum. The action is a joint increment u = (∆ y, ∆x). The explicit scaffold enforces 

y+, x + ∈ [−2, 2] d, ∥∆y∥2 ≤ δy , ∥∆x∥2 ≤ δx. (73) The trilevel scaling experiment uses the same nonconvex construction with state ω = ( z, y, x ). The middle and lower objectives are quartic wells around parameterized targets mϑ(z) and ℓϑ(y, z ): 

fmiddle ,ϑ (y; z) = 14d ∥y ⊙ y − mϑ(z)∥22 + μy

2d ∥y∥22 + λy

2( d − 1) 

> d−1

∑

> i=1

(yi+1 − yi)2,flower ,ϑ (x; y, z ) = 14d ∥x ⊙ x − ℓϑ(y, z )∥22 + μx

2d ∥x∥22 + λx

2( d − 1) 

> d−1

∑

> i=1

(xi+1 − xi)2. (74) The top objective adds quadratic goal terms, quartic well terms for z, y, x , pairwise cross-level penalties, and indefinite bilinear couplings. These objectives define the trilevel problem min 

> z∈[−2,2] d

Ftop ,ϑ 

(z, y ⋆ϑ(z), x ⋆ϑ(z, y ⋆ϑ(z)) ),y⋆ϑ(z) ∈ arg min 

> y∈[−2,2] d

fmiddle ,ϑ (y; z),x⋆ϑ(z, y ) ∈ arg min 

> x∈[−2,2] d

flower ,ϑ (x; y, z ).

(75) The top level depends on ( z, y, x ), the middle level depends on ( y; z), and the lower level depends on ( x; y, z ). Box and step projections are applied separately to z, y, and x.

Progress model and online solver 

Weak solver traces are divided into segments of H = 8 joint increments and conditioned on ( ωt, u t−1, ϑ ). Segment labels use decrease in a fixed-weight scalar progress score minus effort: ∆ρbi (τt, ϑ ) = Φ bi  

> ϑ

(ωt) − Φbi  

> ϑ

(ωt+H ) − η

> H−1

∑

> k=0

∥ut+k∥2. (76) This scalar score is a training and selection certificate for candidate motion; it is not a single-level relaxation used to define the bilevel or trilevel problem. The training distribution is tilted by exp( β∆ρbi (τ, ϑ )). Online, GDC generates joint segments, refines them using the learned score, projects their increments into (73), and compares them with a known-only local update. Selection combines learned energy, predicted decrease in the scalar score, lower merit, and a trust-region penalty. Only the first increment is applied; feasibility or progress failure triggers the known-only fallback. 

Protocol and metrics 

Training uses 50 ,000 parameterized traces, with goals, well locations, low-rank couplings, offsets, and ridge parameters resampled per trace. We compare GDC with known-only and nested local online solvers on held-out parameters. For evaluation only, offline multistart search and SCIP branch-and-cut solves of the original nonconvex bilevel and trilevel formulations provide reference values or incumbents; they are not online runtime competitors. We report ngap = ΦGDC − Φref 

Φinit − Φref 

. (77) This experiment tests whether one learned progress field provides useful cross-level directions on unseen nonconvex instances while the explicit scaffold maintains the known box and step constraints. 20 Numerical results 

The multilevel evaluation treats GDC as an amortized online controller for parameterized bilevel and trilevel nonconvex optimization families. The bilevel experiment uses the family in Section 5.2. The trilevel exper-iment extends the same test from a state ω = ( y, x ) to ω = ( z, y, x ) with top, middle, and lower variables. In both settings, each instance has its own parameter vector, and the controller receives analytic objectives, gradients, local relaxation updates, and known feasibility projection, but not a globally certified solution. The role of GDC is therefore to learn useful joint motion across levels from weak solver traces, while the known scaffold keeps the online updates inside the explicit box and step constraints. For the tables and figures only, we evaluate the final iterates using fixed-weight scalar criteria. These criteria are not the optimization problems solved by the online methods, and they are not a relaxed single-level replacement for (72) or (75). For bilevel instances the reported evaluation criterion is Φ( y, x ) = Fupper (y, x ) + λlower flower (x; y), (78) and for trilevel instances the reported evaluation criterion is Φ( z, y, x ) = Ftop (z, y, x ) + λmiddle fmiddle (y; z) + λlower flower (x; y, z ). (79) Tables 4 and 5 report held-out seed-9001 scaling results under this evaluation criterion. The normalized GDC gap is (Φ GDC − Φref )/(Φ init − Φref ). The reference value is an offline multistart search under the same evaluation criterion; it is used only as an evaluation reference, not as a fair online runtime competitor.                               

> dRef. Φ Known Φ Nested Φ GDC Φ Norm. gap % GDC s 60.122821439 0.727128 0.699750 0.124122773 0.096 44 .659 80.085741765 0.620790 0.601718 0.088084970 0.194 57 .622 10 0.118656182 0.542130 0.508923 0.121497257 0.229 52 .206 12 0.132315706 1.005490 0.914664 0.134485621 0.179 83 .117

Table 4: Bilevel evaluation-score scaling. GDC is the learned online controller; known and nested are conventional online baselines; the reference column is an offline evaluation reference under the same scalar criterion. Normalized gap is reported as 100(Φ GDC − Φref )/(Φ init − Φref ); lower is better.                               

> dRef. Φ Known Φ Nested Φ GDC Φ Norm. gap % GDC s 40.164844401 0.572960 0.658353 0.168670984 0.345 79 .898 60.178681018 1.020626 1.144793 0.180060025 0.093 116 .208 80.122788129 0.951728 1.072284 0.131214128 0.640 138 .865 10 0.178549407 1.059038 1.146033 0.181326304 0.187 138 .403

Table 5: Trilevel evaluation-score scaling. Each dimension reports the selected GDC online evaluation with the lowest final evaluation score among available candidates. Normalized gap is reported as a percentage; all four trilevel cases are below 0 .65%. Table 6 reports the separate SCIP benchmark on the same original nonconvex bilevel and trilevel formulations with a four-hour time limit per case. SCIP is used here as an offline branch-and-cut benchmark. We therefore report its incumbent evaluation score and optimality gap, and mark all time-limit cases as not globally certified. Across both multilevel families, GDC reaches evaluation scores very close to the offline reference search and SCIP incumbents. The bilevel normalized gaps are all below 0 .23%, and the trilevel normalized gaps are all below 0 .65%, the largest being 0 .64% at d = 8. The known and nested online baselines are much faster per rollout, but they are trapped in substantially worse upper or top-level basins despite satisfying the explicit feasibility scaffold. This is the intended role separation: known structure maintains feasibility and local relaxation consistency, while GDC supplies the missing cross-level progress direction. The SCIP branch-and-cut results give complementary evidence that certification for the original nonconvex bilevel and trilevel formulations becomes expensive as dimension grows; except for the smallest bilevel and trilevel cases, 21 Problem d Status Gap Incumbent Φ Time (s) Bilevel 6 optimal 0.000000 0.122821621 22 .6Bilevel 8 timelimit 0.000045 0.085741916 14401 .7Bilevel 10 timelimit 0.000060 0.118656277 14402 .9Bilevel 12 timelimit 0.000270 0.132315706 14400 .0Trilevel 4 optimal 0.000000 0.164844566 327 .8Trilevel 6 timelimit 0.000065 0.178681118 14403 .2Trilevel 8 timelimit 0.001114 0.122788129 14400 .0Trilevel 10 timelimit 0.090036 0.178549407 14400 .0

Table 6: SCIP branch-and-cut benchmark on the original nonconvex bilevel and trilevel formulations with a four-hour time limit per case. Only rows with status “optimal” are globally certified. Rows with status “timelimit” report the best incumbent found within the limit.                  

> B6B8B10 B12 T4T6T8T10 025% 50% 75% 4h budget // // // // // //
> 0.31% 0.40% 0.36% 0.58% 0.55% 0.81% 0.96% 0.96%
> > 249 ×
> > 275 ×
> > 173 ×
> 4.1×
> > 123 ×
> > 103 ×
> > 104 ×

problem instance wall time / four-hour budget 

Figure 3: Online GDC wall time versus SCIP branch-and-cut wall time on the same held-out instances, normalized by the four-hour SCIP budget on a linear scale. Blue GDC bars are intentionally near the baseline; blue labels report the fraction of the four-hour budget used online. Orange SCIP bars at the budget line are time-limit cases, which provide incumbents but are not globally certified. Vertical arrows report the SCIP/GDC wall-time factor; capped SCIP cases are lower bounds.      

> 050 100 150 200 250 10 −1
> 10 0

online iteration evaluation score 

Bilevel          

> d= 6
> d= 8
> d= 10
> d= 12 050 100 150 200 250

online iteration 

Trilevel     

> d= 4
> d= 6
> d= 8
> d= 10

Figure 4: Online convergence of GDC against SCIP branch-and-cut incumbents. Solid curves show the GDC evaluation score over online iterations; dashed horizontal lines of the same color show the corresponding SCIP incumbent for that dimension. SCIP is an offline branch-and-cut reference, not an online competitor. 22 SCIP does not certify global optimality within the four-hour limit. On the time-limit cases, GDC completes online evaluation in 52 .2–138 .9 seconds, using only 0 .36%–0 .96% of the same four-hour budget; the resulting SCIP/GDC wall-time factors are therefore conservative lower bounds, ranging from more than 103 × to more than 275 ×.Figure 3 compares online GDC wall time with SCIP branch-and-cut wall time after normalizing both by the four-hour SCIP budget; time-limit rows are treated as incumbent-only offline references. Figure 4 shows the GDC online trajectories for all reported bilevel and trilevel dimensions approaching their corresponding SCIP incumbents. 

## 6 Discussion and Conclusion 

GDC is intended for partial-physics settings, not for settings where either complete model-based optimization or pure behavioral cloning is already sufficient. Its central design choice is to keep the known scaffold explicit and use feasible-progress data only for the missing directional structure. This distinguishes GDC from diffusion policies, where sampling is the control law, and from standard safe-learning pipelines, where hard constraints are often introduced as costs, shields, or post-hoc corrections. The present results support two complementary claims. In the multilevel optimization simulation, the known-only solver preserves the explicit feasibility scaffold but stalls in poor nonconvex basins, while GDC learns a cross-level progress direction that reaches near-reference Φ values. In SUMO, the learned score actively selects almost every action while the explicit known-constraint layer maintains collision-free route completion and improves arrival relative to rule, imitation, and RL baselines. These settings use different physics and different meanings of progress, but the same separation of roles: known constraints determine what may be executed, and the learned progress path determines which feasible direction is useful. 

## A Additional SUMO Diagnostics 

Figure 5 and Figure 6 provide additional diagnostics for the larger 60 × 60 complex TLS map. These figures are separate scenarios: the first uses the recorded scalability routes, while the second uses newly recorded long-route episodes. Table 7 attaches each SUMO diagnostic figure to the numerical conclusion it supports, including the two held-out transfer figures in Section A.1. Traffic-light constraints are rendered as signal markers. Star markers are reserved for slow or other non-TLS roadblocks; none are present in this TLS-only scalability map. 

A.1 SUMO Transfer Diagnostics 

We also include representative qualitative transfer diagnostics for the two held-out SUMO transfer settings. 

Transfer I: blocked-map transfer keeps the base perturbed road topology fixed and changes the deployment map through held-out road closures and slow/bottleneck edges. This tests whether GDC can reuse the learned progress direction when the feasible scaffold is locally cut or slowed, rather than only replaying routes from the training map. Transfer II: graph-and-disturbance transfer changes the generated graph itself, including grid dimensions, lane count, edge length, speed, traffic-light spacing, and geometric perturbation, while also introducing new closures and bottlenecks. This harder setting tests whether the same progress model remains useful when both the scaffold geometry and the local disturbances move out of the original graph. In both settings, the online controller receives the current known map constraints as Cknown ; transfer therefore concerns the learned direction field on top of a new scaffold, not blind map inference. We show representative maps rather than the full set of ten visualized maps per setting. 

Blocked-map transfer. This setting holds the base perturbed topology fixed and changes only held-out clo-sures and slow roads. On the corresponding 100-map benchmark, GDC keeps arrival/progress at 1 .000 /1.000, has zero known violations, and uses nonfallback learned control on 99 .7% of decisions; the plotted detours therefore summarize the same transfer behavior rather than only qualitative overlays. 

Graph-and-disturbance transfer. This harder setting changes both the generated graph and its local distur-bances. The shown maps span 18 × 19 to 22 × 22 grids, 8–26 closure pairs, and 33–48 bottleneck pairs; the 20 shown closed-loop traces still reach their route goals with zero collisions. 23 Figure 5: Complex TLS scalability diagnostic on the 60 × 60 map. The figure shows ten recorded ego paths, the selected planning horizon at each control step, and the aggregate horizon-use distribution for this scenario. 

Figure 6: Long-route complex TLS scalability diagnostic on the 60 × 60 map. The ten trajectories use 7.0–8 .1 km routes and complete in 1 ,475–1 ,717 control steps; all recorded episodes reach the route goal with zero collisions and no timeout. 24 Figure 7: Representative blocked-map transfer diagnostics. Four held-out maps are shown; each panel overlays five long routes. Red marks closures, orange marks slow/bottleneck roads, and the 1 .7–2 .4 km routes make transfer-time detours inspectable. 25 Figure 8: Held-out graph-and-disturbance transfer examples. Panels use unseen graph parameters and disturbances; red ticks mark closures, dashed orange marks slow roads, icons mark traffic lights, and colored curves are successful long GDC routes. 26 Diagnostic Routes / maps Arr./Prog. Coll. Steps Stressor / diagnostic signal Takeaway                              

> Main complex TLS, Fig. 2 100 eps.; 1.15 [0 .85 ,1.44] km. 1.000 /1.000 0322 .9H=24 on 95 .3% of decisions; mean speed 8 .96 m /s. Long-horizon progress is used while the known scaffold preserves feasibility. 60 ×60 TLS, Fig. 5 10 routes; 1.72 [1 .20 ,2.19] km. 1.000 /1.000 0361 .1H=24 /48 on 91 .4% of decisions; mean speed 12 .41 m /s. Same controller scales to the larger traffic-light graph. 60 ×60 long TLS, Fig. 6 10 routes; 7.43 [7 .03 ,8.09] km. 1.000 /1.000 01578 .07.0–8 .1 km routes; H=24 /48 on 75 .2% of decisions. Tests kilometer-scale closed-loop rollout, beyond local completion. Transfer I: blocked map, Fig. 7 4 shown maps, 20 routes; 1.97 [1 .49 ,2.78] km. 1.000 /1.000 0252 .0Fixed topology; held-out closures and slow roads; 100-map benchmark: zero known violation, 99 .7% nonfallback. Detours are backed by transfer metrics, not only overlays. Transfer II: graph + disturbance, Fig. 8 4 shown maps, 20 traces; 2.32 [1 .90 ,3.06] km. 1.000 /1.000 0579 .9Unseen graph parameters plus disturbances: 18 ×19–22 ×22 grids, 8–26 closure pairs, 33–48 bottleneck pairs. Tests joint graph and disturbance transfer.

Table 7: Summary of the SUMO diagnostic figures. Bracketed route lengths report minimum and maximum values. Transfer I fixes the base topology and changes disturbances, while Transfer II changes graph parameters and disturbances together. The transfer rows summarize the shown routes and the corresponding held-out outcomes. 

## B Additional Theoretical Analysis 

The following results expand the guarantees stated in Section 4. They analyze the fixed objects learned offline and used online: the empirical manifold, the progress-tilted density, its score field, and the induced latent control flow. These results are not additional offline training steps. 

B.1 Notation and standing assumptions for the proofs 

For the proof sections, write c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) for the complete conditioning context, including the selected horizon when it is available. All densities on ̂ M∗ are densities with respect to the Riemannian volume measure dvol G. Euclidean gradients in a latent chart are denoted by ∇z , while grad G denotes the Riemannian gradient. The corresponding Riemannian norm and dual norm are ∥v∥2 

> G

= v⊤G(z)v and 

∥α∥2 

> G−1

= α⊤G(z)−1α. For two probability measures μ, ν on ̂ M∗, ∥μ − ν∥TV denotes total variation distance with the convention ∥μ−ν∥TV = sup A |μ(A)−ν(A)| = 12 ∥μ−ν∥1. The logarithmic score is the chart gradient 

sθ = ∇z log pZθ ; the associated Riemannian score vector is G−1sθ = grad G log pZθ .

Assumption B.1 (Standing regularity) . The following conditions are used in the appendix whenever the corresponding object appears. (a) ̂ M∗ is a connected C2 finite-dimensional manifold equipped with a C1 positive-definite metric G.The metric is uniformly elliptic on the data-supported region considered in the theorem. Either ̂ M∗

has no boundary, or the boundary condition is reflecting/no-flux for all gradient-flow and diffusion arguments. (b) The potentials Φknown , Φdata , Φtask , and their sums are C1 on the relevant region and bounded below; in results using Hessians or strong convexity they are C2 on a geodesically convex neighborhood that does not intersect the cut locus of the minimizer. (c) The conditional latent path densities pZθ (· | c) and their ideal targets are strictly positive and C1

on the data-supported region. Score errors are measured in the dual Riemannian norm unless an explicit Euclidean constant is stated. 

27 (d) The decoder Dψ (·, c ) is KDψ -Lipschitz on the trusted latent region, and its reconstruction error for the first decoded action is bounded by δdec .(e) The known-feasible execution set Uknown (ot, u t−1) is closed and nonempty whenever the projection layer is invoked. If no learned candidate is accepted, the fallback action is assumed to belong to this set. (f) Progress certificates are bounded on every selected finite horizon: |∆ρ(τ, g )| ≤ Rρ. When clipped certificates are used, Rρ = c.

Remark B.2 (Scope of the guarantees) . The proofs are local to the data-supported known-feasible region where H⋆̸ = ∅. Outside this region the algorithm may still execute a known-feasible fallback, but the progress-value and score-direction claims are not invoked. 

Remark B.3 (Frozen context) . The stationary-distribution, free-energy, and Wasserstein statements, and every lim sup t→∞ bound, are stated for a fixed conditioning context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). The deployed controller re-evaluates H⋆t and ot at each step, so these results describe the frozen-context limit that the online iteration tracks between context changes, not a single time-homogeneous process. 

B.2 Energy-based interpretation and implicit value function 

Data energy function 

The marginal likelihood pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) induced by the probabilistic path on ̂ M∗ defines an energy function over the learned empirical manifold. 

Definition B.4 (Data energy) . The data energy function on ̂ M∗ is 

Φdata (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = − log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). (80) Regions of low energy correspond to latent behaviors that are highly consistent with feasible trajectory demonstrations and their progress certificates under observation o, goal g, and the known constraint context. 

Score function on the empirical manifold 

Definition B.5 (Score function) . The score function of the learned distribution on ̂ M∗ is 

sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = ∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = −∇ z Φdata (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). (81) With a clean-behavior predictor, the score at noise level ℓ is induced by the predicted clean latent: 

sdiff  

> θ,ℓ

(zℓ, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) ≈√¯αℓ Fθ (zℓ, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆, ℓ ) − zℓ

1 − ¯αℓ

. (82) 

Implicit progress value theorem 

This is the central theoretical contribution connecting probabilistic paths to control. The fundamental problem of directional ambiguity is that local sensing defines the feasible set but not the 

direction . At an intersection, the camera tells you that left, right, and straight are all traversable—but not which leads to the goal. A local controller ut = f (ot) has access only to feasibility, not to directional intent. GDC resolves this by replacing the local policy with a goal-conditioned latent trajectory distribution 

τ ∼ pτθ (τ | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆), whose latent code z is selected and refined online. The key observation is that this distribution is trained on known-feasible trajectory segments with signed progress certificates. The objective upweights segments that improve a goal-conditioned progress certificate without requiring every short segment to be improving. Therefore, the distribution itself encodes directional information as a statisti-cal bias: at the intersection, right-turning segments receive more mass when they increase expected progress under similar contexts, while necessary waiting or repositioning behaviors need not be excluded. This statistical bias is what the score function extracts: sθ (z) = ∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) points toward latent regions whose decoded segments have higher probability under the progress-tilted conditional 28 distribution. The known-constraint potential ∇Φknown (z) removes options that violate modeled physics; it does not choose among the remaining feasible options or recover unmodeled physics. The score does. We now formalize this intuition. 

Definition B.6 (Data-induced progress value) . The data-induced progress value at latent point z ∈̂ M∗ is 

Vprog (z, g ) = − log pτθ (progress | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆), (83) 

where 

pτθ (progress | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = 

∫

pτθ (τ | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) I[∆ ρ(τ, g ) > 0] I[τ ∈ C known ] d τ (84) 

is the probability of generating a known-feasible trajectory segment that improves the progress certificate ρ.

Theorem B.7 (Score as progress-value gradient) . Fix a context c0 = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) satisfying Assump-tion B.1, and write H := H⋆. Let ΓH (z, c 0) be the set of known-feasible horizon-H continuations starting from latent point z, with reference measure νz ; a continuation τ carries the latent rollout (zj )j<H used to evaluate CH . Under the maximum-entropy model of feasible-progress demonstrations, suppose a trajectory continuation has unnormalized weight 

exp( −CH (τ ; c0)) , CH (τ ; c0) = 

> H−1

∑

> j=0

ℓprog (zj , u j ; c0), (85) 

where lower ℓprog corresponds to larger signed progress certificate improvement. Assume the partition function below is finite, positive, and C1 in z on the data-supported region. Define the soft progress value 

V soft prog (z, c 0) = − log ZH (z, c 0), ZH (z, c 0) = 

∫ 

> ΓH(z,c 0)

exp[ −CH (τ ; c0)] d νz (τ ). (86) 

If the ideal progress-tilted latent density is p⋆(z | c0) = Z−1 

> c0

ZH (z, c 0), then 

− log p⋆(z | c0) = V soft prog (z, c 0) + log Zc0 . (87) 

This identification is a modeling assumption: it holds when the empirical progress-weighted aggregate posterior 

qZβ of (31) , whose reference measure is the known-feasible data measure, agrees with the maximum-entropy continuation density Z−1 

> c0

ZH (·, c 0); the theorem does not derive this agreement from the offline objective. Consequently, if the learned latent path has C1 log-density error ∥∇ z log pZθ − ∇ z log p⋆∥ ≤ εapprox on the data-supported region, then 

sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = ∇z log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = −∇ z V soft prog (z, c 0) + O(εapprox ), (88) 

Proof. By definition of p⋆,log p⋆(z | c0) = log ZH (z, c 0) − log Zc0 = −V soft prog (z, c 0) − log Zc0 .

The normalizer Zc0 depends only on the conditioning context, not on z. Differentiating with respect to z

therefore gives 

∇z log p⋆(z | c0) = −∇ z V soft prog (z, c 0).

The assumed C1 regularity of ZH justifies the differentiation; one sufficient condition is a smoothly parameter-ized continuation set and dominated differentiation under the reference measures νz . Finally, sθ = ∇z log pZθ

and the assumed C1 log-density approximation imply 

∥∥sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + ∇z V soft prog (z, c 0)∥∥ ≤ εapprox ,

which is (88). 29 Remark B.8 (Resolving directional ambiguity) . Theorem B.7 explains why GDC resolves the directional ambiguity problem. The mechanism is not frequency separation between sensor channels. Rather, the mech-anism is that training with signed progress certificates creates a distribution whose selected-horizon samples have positive expected progress when the horizon selector (12) succeeds. At a decision point (e.g., an intersection), the observation ot defines the feasible set {left, right, straight } but provides no directional preference. The path model pτθ (τ | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆), trained with progress-weighted feasible segments, concentrates mass on directions that improve the progress certificate in expectation under similar contexts when H⋆̸ = ∅. The score sθ = ∇z log pZθ converts this statistical bias into a determinis-tic gradient that points toward the locally better region. The known constraint potential ∇Φknown removes explicitly modeled infeasible options; the score chooses among known-feasible options and approximates the implicit feasibility structure. Concretely, define Vprog (z, g ) = − log pτθ (progress | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆). Then if the path model is trained with signed progress certificates, the distribution satisfies a progress-bias property :

Eτ ∼pτθ (·| z,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] > 0. (89) 

The short-horizon distribution is biased toward improving the progress certificate in expectation; individual samples may still wait, backtrack, or reposition when such behavior appears in the data-supported strategy. The directional information is compressed into the distribution over short trajectories, because the training objective weights feasible segments by progress. This is why the controller can use the shortest reliable planning horizon rather than a long goal-reaching rollout: once (12) succeeds, the directional bias is already in the selected-horizon distribution. 

Remark B.9 (Honest caveats) . The implicit Vprog (z, g ) is a progress value of the data policy , not the optimal value function. It encodes “how likely is local progress if you behave like the demonstrations,” not “how likely is final success under the best possible behavior.” The Boltzmann-rational assumption (85) is an idealization; real demonstrations are only approximately maximum-entropy. The connection is strongest when training data is diverse and covers the relevant state space. 

Structural role separation in the control law 

The GDC control law ˙ z = sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − ∇ Φknown (z) provides a secondary benefit beyond the pri-mary value-gradient mechanism: the two terms play structurally distinct roles that prevent high-bandwidth sensor data from drowning out the sparse directional signal. In the control law: ˙z = sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> learned implicit information: where to go and how complex physics behaves

− ∇z Φknown (z)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> known physics: what is explicitly constrained

, (90) the score sθ encodes the goal-conditioned directional information and unmodeled feasibility patterns learned from feasible trajectories with progress certificates, while ∇Φknown encodes explicit feasibility from known physics and high-frequency sensors. The two signals enter the control law additively but in structurally different roles: the score selects which known-feasible option to pursue and approximates implicit effects; the potential gradient removes which options violate known constraints. This separation ensures that high-bandwidth feasibility data (“the road is clear”) cannot override the directional signal (“turn right”), because they act on different components of the control vector. However, this role separation is a consequence of the primary mechanism (Theorem B.7), not the cause. The directional information originates from the training data bias induced by progress certificates, which creates the score. The structural separation merely preserves that information in the control law. 

Total control potential on the empirical manifold 

Let Φ task :̂ M∗ → R encode task-specific objectives. 30 Definition B.10 (Total control potential) . The total control potential on ̂ M∗ is 

ΦGDC (z) = Φ known (z) + Φ data (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)+ Φ task (z)= Φ known (z) − log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)+ Φ task (z).

(91) By Theorem B.7, this is approximately, up to a z-independent constant: ΦGDC (z) ≈ Φknown (z) + V soft prog (z, c 0) + Φ task (z), (92) so control minimizes the sum of explicit known physics, the data-induced approximation of implicit infor-mation, and the task cost. 

B.3 Score-guided control as Riemannian gradient flow 

Riemannian gradient flow on the empirical manifold 

Rather than performing gradient flow in flat Euclidean space, GDC implements control as Riemannian 

gradient flow on ̂ M∗, respecting the intrinsic geometry of the learned behavior manifold while explicitly enforcing known constraints. 

Definition B.11 (Riemannian gradient flow control) . The Riemannian gradient flow control dynamics on ̂

M∗ are 

˙z = − grad G ΦGDC (z) = −G(z)−1∇z ΦGDC (z). (93) 

Proposition B.12 (Score-guided Riemannian control) . Under the decomposition (91) , the Riemannian gradient flow (93) is equivalent to 

˙z = G(z)−1[sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − ∇ z Φknown (z) − ∇ z Φtask (z)] . (94) 

Proof. Compute: grad G ΦGDC (z) = G(z)−1∇z ΦGDC (z) (95) = G(z)−1[−sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + ∇z Φknown (z) + ∇z Φtask (z)] . (96) Substituting into ˙ z = − grad G ΦGDC (z) yields (94). 

Remark B.13 (From sampling to gradient flow) . The mathematical distinction between direct generative policy sampling and GDC is precisely the transformation (1) . In diffusion policy, the score drives a sampling 

process: ˙u = sθ (u), where the dynamics are the controller. In GDC, the score enters a structured control law :

˙z = G(z)−1[sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − ∇ z Φknown (z) − ∇ z Φtask (z)] , (97) 

where the Riemannian metric G(z) respects manifold curvature, Φknown encodes modeled physics and known constraints, and Φtask encodes task objectives. Known constraints are enforced by the support restriction ̂

M∗

> known

, anchor penalties, and candidate filtering. The score provides the implicit information (via the implicit value gradient, Theorem B.7); the known scaffold provides explicit feasibility and stability. In short: diffusion policy performs sampling in action space; GDC defines a controlled Riemannian gradient flow where the path score provides direction and geometry enforces feasibility. 

Singular perturbation structure for known constraints 

For stable online control, the total online potential on ̂ M∗ admits a singular perturbation decomposition. Writing Φ λ for the interpolated potential (134), define 

Vλ(z) = 1

ϵs

Φscaf (z) + λ Φknown (z) + (1 − λ) Φ data (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + Φ task (z), (98) where: 31 • Φ scaf (z) = dG(z, Mt)2 is the fast scaffold potential that keeps z near the known-feasible action-segment support (fast timescale, O(ϵs)). • Φ known (z) is the tangential known-physics potential that slides along ̂ M∗ while respecting modeled constraints (slow timescale, O(1)). • Φ data (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = − log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) is the data-induced potential providing implicit physics and directional guidance from the probabilistic path model. • Φ task (z) is the runtime task potential, entering at O(1) alongside Φ known .The nominal gradient flow is ˙ znom = − grad G Vλ(z), that is, ˙znom = −G(z)−1

[ 1

ϵs

∇z Φscaf (z) + λ ∇z Φknown (z) − (1 − λ) sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + ∇z Φtask (z)

]

, (99) using sθ = −∇ z Φdata ; the parameter λ controls the physics–data balance as in (134). This matches the online latent flow (44) used by the deployed controller. 

Discrete-time implementation 

For computational implementation, the flow (99) is discretized on the learned map: 

zt+1 = zt ⊕ ( ˙znom ,t ∆t), (100) where ⊕ denotes ordinary addition in a flat latent chart or a standard retraction for curved coordinates. Feasibility is maintained by selecting and refining within the anchored support ̂ M∗

> known

(o, g ) and by the known-constraint potential Φ known .

B.4 Langevin control dynamics on the empirical manifold 

Manifold Langevin SDE 

The deterministic Riemannian gradient flow (93) is augmented with a stochastic noise term to obtain the 

manifold Langevin SDE :dzt = − grad G ΦGDC (zt) d t +

√

2β−1L G(zt)−1/2 dWt, (101) where Wt is a standard Brownian motion in Rdz , βL > 0 is an inverse temperature parameter (a sampling knob, unrelated to the offline progress tilt β), and G(z)−1/2 ensures the noise respects the Riemannian geometry. Equation (101) is an intrinsic shorthand: the diffusion is the Riemannian Langevin process whose generator acts on smooth test functions φ as 

Lφ = −⟨ grad G ΦGDC , grad G φ⟩G + β−1L ∆Gφ. (102) In local coordinates this generator includes the usual metric/Christoffel drift terms associated with Brownian motion on ( ̂M∗, G ); the compact notation above suppresses those coordinate artifacts. 

Stochastic score-guided control on the empirical manifold 

Incorporating the score decomposition, the stochastic control dynamics on ̂ M∗ use H⋆t = H⋆(ot, g, Cknown )and are: dzt = G(zt)−1[sθ (zt, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) − ∇ Φknown (zt) − ∇ Φtask (zt)] d t +

√

2β−1L G(zt)−1/2 dWt. (103) The noise term plays the role of stochastic exploration on ̂ M∗: at high temperature ( βL → 0), the dynamics explore broadly across behavior modes on the manifold; at low temperature ( βL → ∞ ), the dynamics reduce to the deterministic Riemannian gradient flow. 32 Euler–Maruyama discretization 

The stochastic dynamics can be discretized by an Euler–Maruyama step in any chosen latent chart: 

vt = ∆ t G (zt)−1[sθ (zt, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆t ) − ∇ Φknown (zt) − ∇ Φtask (zt)] + 

√

2∆ tβ −1L G(zt)−1/2 ξt, (104) 

zt+1 = zt + vt, (105) where ξt ∼ N (0 , I ). If a particular implementation uses group-valued coordinates, the additive update can be replaced by the corresponding retraction, but this is not a core component of GDC. 

B.5 Fokker–Planck analysis on the empirical manifold 

The Fokker–Planck equation on the manifold 

Let p(z, t ) denote the probability density of the process (103) at time t with respect to the Riemannian volume form on ̂ M∗. The evolution satisfies: 

∂p ∂t = div G(p grad G ΦGDC ) + β−1L ∆G p, (106) where div G and ∆ G are the Riemannian divergence and Laplace–Beltrami operators on ( ̂ M∗, G ). 

Stationary distribution 

Proposition B.14 (Stationary distribution on ̂ M∗). Under Assumption B.1, suppose Z =∫̂  

> M∗

exp( −βLΦGDC (z)) dvol G(z) < ∞. Then the manifold Langevin control dynamics have the Gibbs sta-tionary distribution 

π⋆(z) = 1

Z exp( −βL ΦGDC (z)) , Z =

∫̂ 

> M∗

exp( −βL ΦGDC (z)) dvol G(z). (107) 

If the data-supported region is connected and the diffusion is uniformly elliptic and nonexplosive there, this stationary distribution is unique; in particular, this holds on a compact connected region with reflecting/no-flux boundary. Proof. The Fokker–Planck equation can be written as a conservation law ∂tp = − div G Jp with probability flux 

Jp = −p grad G ΦGDC − β−1L grad G p. 

For π⋆ = Z−1 exp( −βLΦGDC ), grad G π⋆ = −βLπ⋆ grad G ΦGDC .

Substitution gives Jπ⋆ = 0, so ∂tπ⋆ = 0 and the reflecting boundary condition, when a boundary is present, is automatically satisfied. Existence follows from the assumed finiteness of Z. For uniqueness, let p be any smooth invariant density in the same no-flux domain and write p = hπ ⋆. Since the generator (102) is reversible with respect to π⋆, the stationarity equation tested against h gives ∫̂  

> M∗

∥ grad G h∥2 

> G

π⋆ dvol G = 0. Hence h is constant on each connected component. Connectedness and normalization force h ≡ 1, so the stationary density is unique. 

Implications for control 

The stationary distribution reveals: 

π⋆(z) ∝ exp (βL log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)) · exp( −βL Φknown (z)) · exp( −βL Φtask (z)) , (108) which is the distribution over behaviors on ̂ M∗ that balances data consistency, known-constraint satisfaction, and task optimality. 33 Free energy and convergence 

Define the free energy functional on ̂ M∗:

F[p] = Ep[Φ GDC ] − β−1L HG(p), (109) where HG(p) = − ∫̂  

> M∗

p log p dvol G is the differential entropy with respect to the Riemannian volume form. 

Proposition B.15 (Free energy descent on ̂ M∗). For smooth positive solutions pt of the Fokker–Planck evolution (106) satisfying the no-flux boundary condition when a boundary is present, 

ddt F[pt] = −

∫̂ 

> M∗

pt

∥∥grad G

(ΦGDC + β−1L log pt

)∥ ∥2 

> G

dvol G

= −β−2L

∫̂ 

> M∗

pt

∥∥∥grad G log pt

π⋆

∥∥∥2

> G

dvol G ≤ 0.

(110) 

Proof. Using HG(p) = − ∫ p log p dvol G, the free energy is 

F[p] = 

∫̂ 

> M∗

pΦGDC dvol G + β−1L

∫̂ 

> M∗

p log p dvol G.

Its first variation is δF

δp = Φ GDC + β−1L (log p + 1) .

The additive constant has zero gradient. The Fokker–Planck equation is equivalently 

∂tp = div G

(p grad G

(ΦGDC + β−1L log p)) .

Therefore, integrating by parts on a boundaryless manifold or using the no-flux boundary condition, ddt F[pt] = 

∫̂ 

> M∗

δF

δp ∂tpt dvol G = −

∫̂ 

> M∗

pt

∥∥grad G

(ΦGDC + β−1L log pt

)∥ ∥2 

> G

dvol G.

Since log( pt/π ⋆) = log pt + βLΦGDC + log Z, its gradient is βL grad G(Φ GDC + β−1L log pt), which gives the second identity and nonpositivity. 

B.6 Trajectory-level probabilistic path control 

Receding-horizon trajectory control 

When inter-step constraints couple multiple time steps, trajectory-level planning on the empirical manifold is preferable. This section extends GDC to the trajectory manifold ̂ MH, ∗: known dynamics and constraints define the scaffold, while feasible trajectory data with progress certificates complete the implicit trajectory-level coupling structure. 

Trajectory path model on the empirical horizon manifold 

Define a trajectory of actions over horizon H: τ = ( ut, . . . , u t+H−1) ∈ U H . The empirical trajectory manifold ̂

MH, ∗ is constructed by encoding and decoding feasible horizon action sequences, while known dynamics are used only where they are available to check or penalize decoded sequences: 

Lhorizon-known = 1

N

> N

∑

> k=1

∑

> r

[

f known 

> r

(DHψ (zk, o k, g k, Cknown ), o k, g k

)

> +

]2

, (111) where DHψ decodes an H-step action sequence. If a known rollout map is available, f known  

> r

may include its dynamic-consistency residuals; if not, it includes only the available safety, actuator, timing, or resource constraints. Residual couplings not captured by fknown are learned from feasible trajectory data through Φdata .34 We train a conditional probabilistic path model on ̂ MH, ∗:

pτθ (τ | ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆) (112) with the same clean-latent prediction objective (28), replacing z with the trajectory latent code on ̂ MH, ∗

and using DHψ to decode the selected clean latent code into an action sequence. 

Trajectory energy and score 

Definition B.16 (Trajectory energy on ̂ MH, ∗).

Φτ (τ ) = − log pτθ (τ | ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + Φ known (τ ) + Φ task (τ ), (113) 

where Φknown (τ ) encodes trajectory-level known constraints and Φtask (τ ) encodes trajectory-level objectives. 

Let sτθ (τ, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = ∇τ log pτθ (τ | ot, g, Cknown , H ⋆). The score-guided trajectory dynamics on ̂ MH, ∗

are: ˙τ = Gτ (τ )−1[sτθ (τ, o t, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − ∇ τ Φknown (τ ) − ∇ τ Φtask (τ )] , (114) where Gτ is the Riemannian metric on the trajectory manifold. 

Receding horizon execution 

Only the first action is executed: ut = τ ⋆ 

> 0

, where τ ⋆ = arg min τ Φτ (τ ) on ̂ MH, ∗. The horizon shifts and the process repeats, yielding a receding-horizon controller that enforces known trajectory-level constraints and uses the path model’s distributional knowledge to approximate implicit trajectory information. 

Progress consistency across horizon 

The trajectory-level formulation provides the sharpest statement of why GDC resolves directional ambiguity. Define the implicit progress value Vprog (z, g ) = − log pτθ (progress | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) as in Definition B.6. 

Proposition B.17 (Progress bias under trajectory sampling) . Let qβ (τ | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) be the progress-tilted known-feasible target distribution at a selected horizon. Suppose that, on a data-supported region 

U ⊂̂ M∗, there is a margin γ > 0 such that 

Eqβ (·| z,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] ≥ γ for all z ∈ U. 

Suppose also that the learned trajectory path satisfies 

∥pτθ (· | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − qβ (· | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆)∥TV ≤ δ for all z ∈ U, 

with 2Rρδ < γ . Then, for latent points within U ,

Eτ ∼pτθ (·| z,g, Cknown ,H ⋆)[∆ ρ(τ, g )] > 0. (115) 

That is, the learned short-horizon trajectory distribution is biased toward known-feasible progress in expecta-tion. Proof. Fix z ∈ U and abbreviate p = pτθ (· | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆) and q = qβ (· | z, g, Cknown , H ⋆). Since 

|∆ρ(τ, g )| ≤ Rρ by Assumption B.1, the total-variation variational characterization gives 

|Ep[∆ ρ(τ, g )] − Eq [∆ ρ(τ, g )] | ≤ 2Rρ∥p − q∥TV ≤ 2Rρδ. 

Therefore 

Ep[∆ ρ(τ, g )] ≥ Eq [∆ ρ(τ, g )] − 2Rρδ ≥ γ − 2Rρδ > 0.

The conclusion is conditional on data support and on the fitting error bound; it does not assert global optimality or final-goal success for every sampled short segment. 35 Remark B.18 (Why this resolves directional ambiguity with short horizons) . Equation (115) is the key formula. It says: even though each planned trajectory is only H steps long, the distribution over such trajectories is biased toward local progress. The directional information is not computed by planning over a long horizon; it is compressed into the distribution over short trajectories because the training objective uses signed progress certificates. At the intersection, if right-turning snippets have higher expected progress under similar goals and contexts, the distribution concentrates more mass on right-turning short trajectories while still allowing waiting or yielding behavior when supported by the data. This is fundamentally different from model-predictive control, which must plan over a long enough horizon to “see” the goal. GDC does not need a long horizon to produce a useful local direction because the progress bias is already baked into the distribution. It still does not claim that every sampled short segment reaches the final goal. 

B.7 Stability analysis 

Lyapunov stability of Riemannian gradient flow 

Theorem B.19 (Lyapunov stability on ̂ M∗). Let ΦGDC :̂ M∗ → R be continuously differentiable and bounded below, with z⋆ an interior strict local minimum of the data-supported region. Consider the Rieman-nian gradient flow (93) . Then: (i) z⋆ is a Lyapunov stable equilibrium on ̂ M∗.(ii) Every trajectory in a sublevel set {z ∈̂ M∗ : Φ GDC (z) ≤ c} remains in that set. (iii) If ΦGDC is m-strongly geodesically convex near z⋆, then z⋆ is exponentially stable with rate m:

dG(zt, z ⋆) ≤ e−mt dG(z0, z ⋆), (116) 

where dG is the geodesic distance on (̂M∗, G ).Proof. Since z⋆ is an interior strict local minimum and Φ GDC is continuous, there is a neighborhood U of 

z⋆ such that V (z) = Φ GDC (z) − ΦGDC (z⋆) is positive on U \ { z⋆} and V (z⋆) = 0. Since z⋆ is an interior local minimum of a C1 function on the local chart, grad G ΦGDC (z⋆) = 0, so z⋆ is an equilibrium. Along the Riemannian gradient flow, ddt V (zt) = dΦ GDC (zt)[ ˙ zt] = ⟨grad G ΦGDC (zt), ˙zt⟩G = − ∥ grad G ΦGDC (zt)∥2 

> G

≤ 0. (117) This proves Lyapunov stability by the standard Lyapunov sublevel argument: for any sufficiently small neighborhood U0 of z⋆, choose a compact sublevel set of V contained in U0; the trajectory cannot leave it because V is nonincreasing. The same calculation proves (ii), since every sublevel set of Φ GDC is forward invariant. For (iii), restrict to a geodesically convex normal neighborhood in which the squared distance is smooth. Let 

W (t) = 12 dG(zt, z ⋆)2. The first-variation formula gives ˙W (t) = ⟨− Log zt (z⋆), ˙zt⟩G = ⟨Log zt (z⋆), grad G ΦGDC (zt)⟩G.

Geodesic m-strong convexity with minimizer z⋆ implies ⟨grad G ΦGDC (zt), −Log zt (z⋆)⟩G ≥ m d G(zt, z ⋆)2.Hence ˙W (t) ≤ − m d G(zt, z ⋆)2 = −2mW (t). Gronwall’s inequality gives W (t) ≤ e−2mt W (0), and therefore 

dG(zt, z ⋆) ≤ e−mt dG(z0, z ⋆). 

Robustness to score estimation error 

Define the score estimation error δ(z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) = sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) − s⋆(z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆). 

Assumption B.20 (Bounded score error) . The score error is uniformly bounded in the dual Riemannian norm: 

sup 

> z∈

̂ M∗,o,g 

∥δ(z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)∥G−1 ≤ ε. 

36 Theorem B.21 (Robustness on ̂ M∗). Under Assumption B.20, suppose the true total potential is m-strongly geodesically convex on a geodesically convex data-supported neighborhood containing the trajectory and has minimizer z⋆. Then the approximate dynamics converge to a neighborhood: 

lim sup 

> t→∞

dG(zt, z ⋆) ≤ εm . (118) 

Proof. Let e(z) = G(z)−1δ(z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆), so ∥e(z)∥G = ∥δ(z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆)∥G−1 ≤ ε. In the geodesically convex neighborhood, use V (z) = 12 dG(z, z ⋆)2. The perturbed Riemannian gradient flow is ˙z = − grad G Φ⋆(z) + e(z). By the first-variation formula, ˙V = ⟨− Log z (z⋆), − grad G Φ⋆(z) + e(z)⟩G

= ⟨Log z (z⋆), grad G Φ⋆(z)⟩G − ⟨ Log z (z⋆), e (z)⟩G

≤ − m d G(z, z ⋆)2 + ε d G(z, z ⋆)= −dG(z, z ⋆) ( m d G(z, z ⋆) − ε) . (119) Thus ˙V < 0 whenever dG(z, z ⋆) > ε/m . For every η > 0, the closed exterior of the ball of radius ε/m + η

has strictly negative derivative except possibly at its boundary, so trajectories cannot remain outside that enlarged ball indefinitely. Letting η ↓ 0 gives the stated limsup bound. 

Non-accumulation of discretization drift 

Local refinement introduces a small discretization drift per step. The next statement records that the retraction/backtracking guard of the online controller is what keeps this local integration error uniformly controlled; it is a design guarantee of that guard, not a consequence of the integrator alone. 

Proposition B.22 (Non-accumulation of drift) . Let Φscaf (z) = dG(z, Mt)2, where Mt is the local known-feasible latent scaffold. Suppose each accepted latent update starts in Mt, has capped metric length at most 

Vmax ∆t, and applies the retraction/backtracking guard dG(zt+1 , Mt) ≤ √ϵs/2 Vmax ∆t. Then the manifold deviation satisfies, for every t,

Φscaf (zt) ≤ ϵs

2 V 2max ∆t2. (120) 

The bound is uniform in t, vanishes as ∆t → 0, and does not accumulate. Proof. The capped integrator guarantees that the raw update moves by at most Vmax ∆t in the metric. The scaffold correction is accepted only when the post-correction point has distance at most √ϵs/2 Vmax ∆t from 

Mt. Since Φ scaf is the squared distance to Mt,Φscaf (zt) = dG(zt, Mt)2 ≤ ϵs

2 V 2max ∆t2.

This is a per-step guard on the accepted latent state rather than a sum of local truncation errors. Hence the same upper bound holds uniformly over time and cannot grow with the rollout horizon. 

End-to-end action error bound 

Theorem B.23 (End-to-end action error bound) . Under the conditions of Theorem B.21 and Proposi-tion B.22, the asymptotic receding-horizon action error, with KDψ -Lipschitz decoder and decoder error δdec ,satisfies 

lim sup 

> t→∞

∥ut − u⋆t ∥ ≤ KDψ

(√ ϵs

2 Vmax ∆t + εm

)

+ δdec . (121) 

The first term is the geometric integration drift, the second is the score approximation error, and the third is the offline decoder error. All three are independently controllable and do not accumulate over time. The same bound holds pointwise for any accepted update whose in-scaffold refinement point lies within the ε/m 

robustness tube around the ideal latent point. 

37 Proof. Let z⋆t be the ideal latent point whose first decoded action is u⋆t , and let ¯ zt be the in-scaffold point reached by the approximate dynamics. Theorem B.21 gives lim sup t→∞ dG(¯ zt, z ⋆t ) ≤ ε/m . Proposition B.22 bounds the distance from the accepted numerical latent point zt to ¯ zt by √ϵs/2 Vmax ∆t. By the triangle inequality in the local geodesically convex neighborhood, lim sup 

> t→∞

dG(zt, z ⋆t ) ≤

√ ϵs

2 Vmax ∆t + εm .

The decoder is KDψ -Lipschitz on this neighborhood, so the first decoded actions satisfy 

∥Dψ (zt, c )0 − Dψ (z⋆t , c )0∥ ≤ KDψ dG(zt, z ⋆t ).

Adding the decoder reconstruction error δdec and taking limsup gives (121). The final known-constraint projection onto the convex set Uknown (ot, u t−1) is non-expansive and leaves the feasible ideal action fixed, so it does not enlarge the bound; when Uknown is nonconvex one adds a projection term δproj as in Theorem B.25. If an accepted update satisfies the robustness-tube condition pointwise, the same triangle-inequality argument gives the pointwise version. The estimate is independent of the number of future rollout steps. 

Approximate optimality under value consistency 

The previous bounds compare GDC to an ideal latent controller induced by the learned potential. To turn this into an optimality statement, one additional assumption is necessary: the data-induced potential must approximate the same constrained objective whose optimum we want to recover. The following theorem makes this conditional statement explicit. 

Definition B.24 (Oracle constrained horizon objective) . For a selected context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) and data-supported region Uc ⊂̂ M∗, let ΓH (z, c ) be the set of known-feasible horizon-H⋆ continuations starting from latent point z. The oracle constrained horizon objective is a function Φopt (·, c ) : Uc → R whose minimizers are the constrained optimal latent decisions on this region. In the deterministic case one may take 

Φopt (z, c ) = inf    

> τ∈ΓH(z,c )

Copt (τ ; c), (122) 

where Copt contains the task cost and all known and implicit feasibility costs. In the entropy-regularized case, the infimum is replaced by the soft minimum −β−1opt log ∫  

> ΓH(z,c )

exp[ −βopt Copt (τ ; c)] d νz (τ ). The theorem below applies after fixing either convention. Additive constants in Φopt are immaterial. 

Theorem B.25 (Asymptotic optimality) . Fix a selected context c = ( o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) and a compact geodesi-cally convex data-supported region Uc ⊂̂ M∗. Let Φopt (·, c ) : Uc → R be the oracle constrained horizon objective for the same task, horizon, and known-feasible scaffold, and assume it has a unique minimizer 

z⋆ = arg min 

> z∈Uc

Φopt (z, c ).

For a sequence of learned GDC controllers indexed by n, write Φn(z, c ) for the learned potential ΦGDC (z, c )

and let ˆzn ∈ Uc be the latent point returned by online refinement. Suppose: (i) Uniform value consistency up to normalization. There are constants an(c) and errors αn ≥ 0

such that 

sup 

> z∈Uc

|Φn(z, c ) − Φopt (z, c ) − an(c)| ≤ αn. (123) 

(ii) Approximate online minimization. The refinement step is ηn-optimal on Uc:

Φn(ˆ zn, c ) ≤ inf 

> z∈Uc

Φn(z, c ) + ηn. (124) 

(iii) Local curvature. Φopt (·, c ) is m-strongly geodesically convex on Uc:

Φopt (z, c ) ≥ Φopt (z⋆, c ) + m

2 dG(z, z ⋆)2 for all z ∈ Uc. (125) 38 Then the oracle suboptimality gap and latent distance satisfy 

0 ≤ Φopt (ˆ zn, c ) − Φopt (z⋆, c ) ≤ 2αn + ηn, (126) 

and 

dG(ˆ zn, z ⋆) ≤

√ 2(2 αn + ηn)

m . (127) 

If the first-action decoder is KDψ -Lipschitz on Uc, its first-action reconstruction error is at most δdec ,n , and the final projection changes the decoded action by at most δproj ,n , then the executed action ut,n satisfies 

∥ut,n − u⋆t ∥ ≤ KDψ

√ 2(2 αn + ηn)

m + δdec ,n + δproj ,n . (128) 

Consequently, if αn → 0, ηn → 0, δdec ,n → 0, and δproj ,n → 0, then 

Φopt (ˆ zn, c ) → Φopt (z⋆, c ), dG(ˆ zn, z ⋆) → 0, ∥ut,n − u⋆t ∥ → 0.

Proof. Fix n and abbreviate ̂ Φ = Φ n(·, c ), Φ ⋆ = Φ opt (·, c ), and a = an(c). By the value-consistency bound (123), evaluated at ˆ zn,Φ⋆(ˆ zn) ≤̂ Φ(ˆ zn) − a + αn.

The approximate-minimization condition (124) gives ̂

Φ(ˆ zn) ≤̂ Φ( z⋆) + ηn,

since z⋆ ∈ Uc. Applying (123) again, now at z⋆, yields ̂

Φ( z⋆) ≤ Φ⋆(z⋆) + a + αn.

Combining the three inequalities cancels the arbitrary normalization constant a and gives Φ⋆(ˆ zn) − Φ⋆(z⋆) ≤ 2αn + ηn.

The lower bound in (126) follows from optimality of z⋆. Strong geodesic convexity (125) then implies 

m

2 dG(ˆ zn, z ⋆)2 ≤ Φ⋆(ˆ zn) − Φ⋆(z⋆) ≤ 2αn + ηn,

which proves (127). Let Dψ (z, c )0 denote the first decoded action. If u⋆t is the oracle first action decoded from z⋆, Lipschitz continuity on Uc gives 

∥Dψ (ˆ zn, c )0 − Dψ (z⋆, c )0∥ ≤ KDψ dG(ˆ zn, z ⋆).

The decoder reconstruction error contributes at most δdec ,n , and the final projection contributes at most 

δproj ,n by assumption. Substituting the distance bound gives (128). If the four error sequences vanish, the displayed convergence statements follow immediately. 

Corollary B.26 (Coverage and convergence rate) . In the setting of Theorem B.25, let Zn(c) ⊂ Uc be the finite set of latent anchors covered by the offline data for context c, and define its fill distance 

hn = sup 

> z∈Uc

inf  

> ζ∈Z n(c)

dG(z, ζ ). (129) 

Suppose Φn(·, c ) and Φopt (·, c ) are Lipschitz on Uc with constants Ln and Lopt , and that the learned potential has anchor value error 

sup 

> ζ∈Z n(c)

|Φn(ζ, c ) − Φopt (ζ, c ) − an(c)| ≤ εn. (130) 39 If the online refinement after K local optimization steps returns ˆzn,K with error ηK , then 

Φopt (ˆ zn,K , c ) − Φopt (z⋆, c ) ≤ 2εn + 2( Ln + Lopt )hn + ηK , (131) 

dG(ˆ zn,K , z ⋆) ≤

√ 2 [2 εn + 2( Ln + Lopt )hn + ηK ]

m , (132) 

∥ut,n,K − u⋆t ∥ ≤ KDψ

√ 2 [2 εn + 2( Ln + Lopt )hn + ηK ]

m + δdec ,n + δproj ,K . (133) 

Therefore, if sup n Ln < ∞, εn = O(rn), hn = O(sn), and ηK = O(qK ), then the value gap is O(rn +sn +qK )

and the first-action error is 

O(√rn + sn + qK + δdec ,n + δproj ,K 

) .

In particular, quasi-uniform deterministic coverage of a d-dimensional region gives hn = O(n−1/d ). If an-chors are sampled iid from a distribution whose density is bounded below on Uc, then hn = Op((log n/n )1/d ).With a linearly convergent local refinement ηK ≤ Cη e−κK , the value gap becomes 

O(rn + sn + e−κK ) .

Proof. For any z ∈ Uc, choose an anchor ζz ∈ Z n(c) with dG(z, ζ z ) ≤ hn. The triangle inequality gives 

|Φn(z, c ) − Φopt (z, c ) − an(c)|≤ | Φn(z, c ) − Φn(ζz , c )| + |Φn(ζz , c ) − Φopt (ζz , c ) − an(c)|

+ |Φopt (ζz , c ) − Φopt (z, c )|≤ (Ln + Lopt )hn + εn.

Thus the uniform value-consistency error in (123) can be chosen as αn = εn + ( Ln + Lopt )hn. Substituting this value of αn into (126), (127), and (128) yields (131)–(133). The big-O statements follow by replacing each error sequence with its rate. For iid coverage, cover Uc by at most Cr −d geodesic balls of radius r/ 2. If the sampling density is bounded below, each such ball has probability mass at least cr d for small enough r. A union bound gives Pr[ hn > r ] ≤ Cr −d exp( −ncr d).

Choosing r = A(log n/n )1/d with A large enough makes this probability vanish, proving hn =

Op((log n/n )1/d ). 

Remark B.27 (What the optimality theorem does and does not claim) . Theorem B.25 is stronger than the feasible-progress guarantee and requires a stronger premise. It does not say that arbitrary progress-certified demonstrations are automatically globally optimal. It says that when the learned data potential becomes uniformly value-consistent with the oracle constrained objective on the selected data-supported region, and the online refinement error also vanishes, the GDC decision approaches the corresponding constrained optimal decision on that region. 

B.8 Physics–data interpolation 

Interpolated control potential under partial physics 

Definition B.28 (Physics–data control potential) . For λ ∈ [0 , 1] , the interpolated control potential on ̂ M∗

is 

Φλ(z) = λ Φknown (z) + (1 − λ) Φ data (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + Φ task (z). (134) 

Interpolation theorem 

Theorem B.29 (Physics–data interpolation under partial physics) . Let λ ∈ [0 , 1] and define the control law 

˙z = − grad G Φλ(z). (135) 

Then: 

40 (i) At λ = 1 , (135) uses only the explicit known-physics potential and the task potential. (ii) At λ = 0 , (135) uses the data-driven progress potential Φdata + Φ task , where Φdata supplies implicit progress and dynamics information from feasible trajectory data with progress certificates. (iii) For λ ∈ (0 , 1) , (135) is a hybrid controller on ̂ M∗ interpolating between explicit known-physics control and data-driven completion, with known-feasible support, anchor penalties, and singular perturbation structure. (iv) The Riemannian gradient has the explicit form: 

grad G Φλ = G−1[λ ∇z Φknown − (1 − λ) sθ (z, o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + ∇z Φtask ] . (136) 

Proof. The potential is affine in λ:Φλ = λΦknown + (1 − λ)Φ data + Φ task .

Substituting λ = 1 removes the data term and yields Φ known + Φ task , proving (i). Substituting λ = 0 removes the known-potential weight from this interpolated term and yields Φ data + Φ task , proving (ii). For any λ ∈ (0 , 1), both Φ known and Φ data enter the same scalar potential on the same manifold ̂ M∗, while the support restriction, anchors, filters, and projection layer remain those of the known scaffold; hence the induced flow is the stated hybrid controller, proving (iii). For (iv), differentiate: 

∇z Φλ = λ∇z Φknown + (1 − λ)∇z Φdata + ∇z Φtask .

Since Φ data = − log pZθ , we have ∇z Φdata = −sθ . Multiplying by G−1 gives the displayed Riemannian gradient formula. 

Data-physics tradeoff path 

Corollary B.30 (Data-physics tradeoff path on ̂ M∗). Suppose the relevant data-supported region K ⊂̂ M∗

is compact and each Φλ is continuous on K. Then minimizers of Φλ(z) on K exist for every λ ∈ [0 , 1] . If the minimizer is unique for each λ, the minima trace a continuous data-physics tradeoff path 

P =

{

z⋆(λ) = arg min 

> z∈K

Φλ(z)

∣∣∣∣ λ ∈ [0 , 1] 

}

. (137) 

Proof. Existence follows from the Weierstrass theorem because Φ λ is continuous on the compact region K.The joint map ( z, λ ) 7 → Φλ(z) is continuous since it is affine in λ and continuous in z. Berge’s maximum theorem implies that the argmin correspondence is nonempty, compact-valued, and upper hemicontinuous. When the minimizer is unique for every λ, this correspondence is single-valued; a single-valued upper hemi-continuous argmin map on a compact parameter interval is continuous. Therefore z⋆(λ) traces the stated continuous tradeoff path. 

B.9 Online control used in the theory 

The stability and interpolation results below analyze the online controller defined in Section 3.3. In particular, the learned models are frozen, the controller operates in latent space, known constraints are checked after decoding through Dψ , and only the first action of the selected segment is executed. 

B.10 Wasserstein gradient flow interpretation 

GDC as Wasserstein gradient flow on the empirical manifold 

Theorem B.31 (GDC as Wasserstein gradient flow) . Under Assumption B.1, the Fokker–Planck evolution 

(106) on ̂ M∗ is the Wasserstein gradient flow of the free energy: 

F[p] = Ep

[− log pZθ (z | o, g, Cknown , H ⋆) + Φ known (z) + Φ task (z)] − β−1L HG(p), (138) 

where the Wasserstein metric is computed with respect to geodesic distances on (̂ M∗, G ).

41 Proof. Write 

F[p] = 

∫̂ 

> M∗

p(z)Φ GDC (z) dvol G + β−1L

∫̂ 

> M∗

p(z) log p(z) dvol G.

Its first variation is δF

δp = Φ GDC + β−1L (log p + 1) .

In the 2-Wasserstein geometry induced by the Riemannian metric G, the gradient-flow equation for F is the continuity equation 

∂tp = div G

(

p grad G

δF

δp 

)

.

Dropping the additive constant in the first variation gives 

∂tp = div G(p grad G ΦGDC ) + β−1L div G(p grad G log p) .

Since p grad G log p = grad G p, the second term is β−1L ∆Gp. This is exactly (106). 

GDC is the steepest descent in probability space over ̂ M∗, simultaneously minimizing the expected control po-tential (known physics, data-induced implicit information, and task cost) and maximizing behavioral entropy on the manifold. 

## References 

J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 70, pages 22–31, 2017. A. Agrawal, B. Amos, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, S. Diamond, and J. Z. Kolter. Differentiable convex optimization layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32:9558–9570, 2019. B. Amos and J. Z. Kolter. OptNet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 70, pages 136–145, 2017. M. Bardi and I. Capuzzo-Dolcetta. Optimal Control and Viscosity Solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equations . Birkhäuser, Boston, 1997. doi:10.1007/978-0-8176-4755-1. R. Bellman. Dynamic Programming . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1957. Q. Bertrand, Q. Klopfenstein, M. Blondel, S. Vaiter, A. Gramfort, and J. Salmon. Implicit differentiation of Lasso-type models for hyperparameter optimization. Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 119, pages 810–821, 2020. D. P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control, Volume I . Athena Scientific, fourth edition, 2017. J. Buerger, M. Cannon, and M. Doff-Sotta. Safe learning in nonlinear model predictive control. Proceedings of the 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 242, pages 603–614, 2024. S. Carr, N. Jansen, S. Junges, and U. Topcu. Safe Reinforcement Learning via Shielding under Partial Observability. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 37(12):14748–14756, 2023. doi:10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26723. R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31, 2018. C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. C. M. Burchfiel, and S. Song. Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. Robotics: Science and Systems , 2023. doi:10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.026. 42 B. Colson, P. Marcotte, and G. Savard. An overview of bilevel optimization. Annals of Operations Research ,153(1):235–256, 2007. doi:10.1007/s10479-007-0176-2. V. De Bortoli, E. Mathieu, M. Hutchinson, J. Thornton, Y. W. Teh, and A. Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modelling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:2406–2422, 2022. doi:10.52202/068431-0175. S. Dempe and A. Zemkoho, editors. Bilevel Optimization: Advances and Next Challenges . Springer Optimiza-tion and Its Applications, volume 161. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-52119-6. A. Hyvärinen. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. Journal of Machine Learn-ing Research , 6:695–709, 2005. M. Janner, Y. Du, J. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis. 

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 162, pages 9902–9915, 2022. R. Jordan, D. Kinderlehrer, and F. Otto. The variational formulation of the Fokker–Planck equation. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis , 29(1):1–17, 1998. doi:10.1137/S0036141096303359. B. Könighofer, R. Bloem, N. Jansen, S. Junges, and S. Pranger. Shields for Safe Reinforcement Learning. 

Communications of the ACM , 68(11):80–90, 2025. doi:10.1145/3715958. I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine. Offline Reinforcement Learning with Implicit Q-Learning. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker. Recent development and applications of SUMO– Simulation of Urban MObility. International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements , 5(3– 4):128–138, 2012. A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. Conservative Q-Learning for Offline Reinforcement Learning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33, 2020. S. Levine. Reinforcement Learning and Control as Probabilistic Inference: Tutorial and Review. Preprint, arXiv:1805.00909, 2018. T. Li and K. He. Back to Basics: Let Denoising Generative Models Denoise. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 36115–36125, 2026. P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, Y.-P. Flötteröd, R. Hilbrich, L. Lücken, J. Rummel, P. Wagner, and E. Wießner. Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO. Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems , pages 2575–2582, 2018. doi:10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569938. D. Q. Mayne, J. B. Rawlings, C. V. Rao, and P. O. M. Scokaert. Constrained model predictive control: Stability and optimality. Automatica , 36(6):789–814, 2000. doi:10.1016/S0005-1098(99)00214-9. M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning frame-work for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. A. Z. Ren, J. Lidard, L. L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, P. Agrawal, A. Majumdar, B. Burchfiel, H. Dai, and M. Simchowitz. Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization. International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2025. Y. Song and S. Ermon. Improved Techniques for Training Score-Based Generative Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33, 2020. 43 T. Su, T. Wu, J. Zhao, A. Scaglione, and L. Xie. A review of safe reinforcement learning methods for modern power systems. Proceedings of the IEEE , 113(3):213–255, 2025. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2025.3584656. R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . MIT Press, second edition, 2018. A. Wachi, X. Shen, and Y. Sui. A Survey of Constraint Formulations in Safe Reinforcement Learning. 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 8262–8271, 2024. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2024/913. Z. Wang, J. J. Hunt, and M. Zhou. Diffusion Policies as an Expressive Policy Class for Offline Reinforcement Learning. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. W. Zhao, T. He, R. Chen, T. Wei, and C. Liu. State-wise Safe Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 6814–6822, 2023. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2023/763. Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, H. He, Y. Zhong, S. Zhang, H. Guo, T. Chen, and W. Zhang. Diffusion Models for Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. Preprint, arXiv:2311.01223, 2023. 44