Title: Safety-aware Skill Adaptation for Reinforcement Learning in Dynamic Environments

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.11433v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 01:00:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Safety-aware Skill Adaptation for Reinforcement Learning in Dynamic Environments 

A K M Nadimul Haque, Sheila Sutjipto, Marc G. Carmichael and Teresa Vidal-Calleja 

Abstract — Skill adaptation frameworks based on reinforce-ment learning often require restrictive assumptions to main-tain stability, such as fixed observations or tightly controlled exploration schedules. In cluttered and dynamic environments, however, unrestricted exploration can lead to unsafe behaviour and unstable learning, particularly when task-relevant observa-tions lie near obstacles or involve moving objects. In this work, we present Dist-GPRL, a distance-aware and safety-guided reinforcement learning framework for structured robot skill adaptation. Building upon Gaussian Process (GP)-based skill parameterisation, our framework sequentially adapts overlap-ping local windows of sparse trajectory via-points rather than modifying the complete skill at every policy step. Raw policy outputs are correlated through the GP covariance structure, producing temporally coherent trajectory updates while reduc-ing the action-space and credit-assignment difficulties associ-ated with global trajectory adaptation. Safety is incorporated through two complementary forms of guidance. A safe-subspace prior derived from the Hausdorff Approximation Planner (HAP) biases policy exploration toward feasible regions, while dynamically updated distance field clearance and gradient re-wards provide local obstacle awareness. A trajectory-kinematics similarity regulariser further preserves the demonstrated ve-locity and acceleration characteristics during adaptation. We evaluate the framework on two dynamic object-manipulation tasks in simulation and transfer the learned policy to real-world robot execution. Experimental results demonstrate higher task success, lower collision frequency, and more stable learning than the baselines, while preserving the kinematic characteristics of the demonstrated skill. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Collaborative robots operating in industrial and unstruc-tured environments must adapt learned skills to varying task configurations (TC) such as different object poses, and start or end conditions, while maintaining safety and motion consistency. Rather than simply reproducing demonstrated trajectories, modern robotic systems increasingly focus on learning parameterised skills that can be robustly adapted to new TCs while retaining the kinematic properties of expert demonstrations. Skill learning encodes structured motion pri-ors, whereas safe skill adaptation requires generalising these priors to novel and potentially dynamic task configurations without compromising safety or motion consistency. Recent works have explored hybrid frameworks that com-bine probabilistic skill parameterisation with deep rein-forcement learning (DRL) to enable efficient adaptation. 

This work was supported by the Industrial Transformation Training Centre (ITTC) for Collaborative Robotics in Advanced Manufacturing (also known as the Australian Cobotics Centre) funded by ARC (Project ID: IC200100001). All authors are with the Robotics Institute, University of Tech-nology Sydney, Australia (e-mail: akmnadimul.haque@student.uts.edu.au, 

{sheila.sutjipto,marc.carmichael,teresa.vidalcalleja }@uts.edu.au) 

Fig. 1. Distance field guidance with safe subspace prior facilitates policies that produce structured trajectory modifications that avoid obstacles while preserving demonstrated kinematics. The learned policy adapts skills in simulation (top) and transfers them to real-world robot execution (bottom). 

Representations such as Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) [1], and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) [2] have been integrated with DRL. However, DMPs lack the ability to model trajectory distributions, while GMM-based approaches often exhibit limited expressiveness in complex manipulation tasks. ProMPs [3] are more expressive, but lack intuitive integration with DRL adaptation. Gaussian Processes (GPs) also provide a more expressive alternative for skill repre-sentation and have been integrated with DRL frameworks for adaptation [4], enabling structured adaptation on TCs and improved retention of demonstrated kinematics. Despite these advantages, existing GP-based adaptation frameworks rely on restrictive assumptions to maintain stability, such as fixed and collision-free TC observations, as well as annealed exploration. These assumptions break down in cluttered envi-ronments, where TC observations may lie near obstacles and unrestricted policy exploration can lead to unstable learning. arXiv:2609.11433v1 [cs.RO] 10 Sep 2026 Specifically, ensuring safety during structured skill adap-tation remains largely underexplored. While some ap-proaches incorporate safety through reward shaping, explicit geometry-aware exploration remains limited. Prior work has introduced task-dependent safe subspaces [5] to guide policy exploration toward feasible robot configurations. However, constructing and updating these subspaces can be computa-tionally expensive and robot-specific, limiting their applica-bility when the environment changes dynamically. A complementary notion of safety can be expressed through proximity to obstacles. Distance fields provide a robot-agnostic and continuous representation of clearance from nearby surfaces, together with well-defined gradients that indicate locally safer directions for motion. They have proven useful in safe navigation [6] and manipulation [7]. However, their integration with structured adaptation of demonstrated skills remains relatively unexplored. In this work, we propose Dist-GPRL, a safety-aware reinforcement learning framework that extends structured GP-based skill adaptation to cluttered and dynamic en-vironments. Unlike prior GPRL formulations [4], which adapt the complete via-point set simultaneously, Dist-GPRL sequentially updates overlapping local trajectory windows. This reduces the effective action space and improves credit assignment while retaining the global GP trajectory rep-resentation. Within each window, raw policy outputs are transformed through the GP covariance rather than ap-plied independently to individual via-points. This couples neighbouring modifications according to the demonstrated trajectory prior, producing temporally coherent adaptations and improving learning stability. Safety is introduced through two complementary forms of guidance: a safe-subspace prior derived from the Hausdorff Approximation Planner (HAP) biases policy exploration toward feasible pose regions, while dynamically updated distance field rewards provide local clearance and obstacle-avoidance feedback as the environ-ment changes. Cosine similarity regularisation further pre-serves the demonstrated kinematic profile, preventing safety-driven adaptation from unnecessarily altering the underlying motion characteristics. Fig. 1 illustrates Dist-GPRL applied to the dynamic bar manipulation task in both simulation and real-world execution. To summarise, our contributions are:  

> •

A local, structured skill adaptation formulation that sequentially updates overlapping temporal windows, reducing the action-space and credit-assignment diffi-culties associated with global via-point adaptation.  

> •

A GP covariance-based action transformation that maps independent policy outputs into coherent via-point mod-ifications consistent with the temporal structure of the demonstrated skill.  

> •

A complementary safety-guidance formulation that combines a HAP-derived safe-subspace prior for ef-ficient exploration, and dynamically updated distance field rewards for local obstacle awareness, while retain-ing demonstrated kinematics through kinematic similar-ity regularisation.  

> •

Experimental validation on dynamic manipulation tasks in simulation and on real hardware with ablation studies and safety metrics. II. R ELATED WORK 

Skill learning and consequent adaptation have gained significant traction in recent times. Several trajectory param-eterisation frameworks have been proposed for skill represen-tation, including Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) [8], Probabilistic Movement Primitives (ProMPs) [3], and Gaus-sian Mixture Models (GMMs) [9]. Among these approaches, Gaussian Processes (GPs) [10] provide a particularly ex-pressive representation and are well suited for structured adaptation due to their analytical derivatives and probabilistic formulation [4]. The work of [4] used a via-point-based GP parameterisation to successfully adapt the demonstrated skill to cater for a wide range of TCs. To keep the RL-based adap-tation structured, the authors proposed signature similarity-based rewards and introduced heavy exploration annealing. The framework also keeps the via-point corresponding to the observed TC fixed during optimisation to aid convergence. However, anchoring the adaptation around the fixed via-point leads to exploration only near the conditioned mean. Thus, if the observed TC is close to collision, limited exploration will result in adaptation policies that result in collisions. Existing literature has also prioritised safety in skill learning and adaptation. Authors in [5] used HAP [11] in conjunction with a GMM parameterised skill and consequent RL adaptation to encourage exploration in a safe subspace. HAP provides a subspace of poses that are safe, feasible and optimal for the robot under the current task configuration, which can effectively guide policies to converge quickly. However, building and updating dense HAP subspaces is computationally expensive. Thus, under dynamic scenar-ios, such notions of safe exploration become less reliable. Safety during manipulation can also be represented through geometry-aware measures of obstacle proximity. Distance fields provide such a representation by encoding the clear-ance between the robot and surrounding obstacles across the workspace. They are computationally more efficient, and with recent works focusing on real-time generation and up-dates [12], they provide a viable framework for manipulation in dynamic environments. Despite this, distance fields in combination with DRLs for skill learning have rarely appeared in the literature. Authors in [13] proposed a hierarchical approach where RL proposed a high-level, velocity-based planning, while a lower-level quadratic program constrained by a signed distance field (SDF) ran strict joint velocity controls. Liu et al. [7] extended the ATACOM framework [14] with a regularised deep SDF and soft actor-critic (SAC) network. The SAC policy is trained on a constrained tangential space. Strict collision constraints modelled by the ReSDF were projected to the null space for constrained policy learning. However, structured skill adaptation with distance field–based shaping within the reinforcement learning reward has been less explored, Fig. 2. A demonstrated skill is parameterised with GPs and sparse via-points. During simulation training, Dist-GPRL sequentially adapts local via-point windows using covariance-transformed actions, HAP safe-subspace regularisation, and distance field safety feedback. The learned policy is then transferred to hardware to perform one-shot skill adaptation using the real-world distance field. 

especially when combined with probabilistic trajectory rep-resentations such as GPs that enable dense action correlation and kinematic retention. III. B ACKGROUND 

A. Gaussian Process Skill Parameterisation 

Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide a non-parametric prob-abilistic representation of continuous functions. A demon-strated trajectory ζ(t) can be modelled as 

ζ(t) ∼ GP (0 , k (t, t ′)) , (1) where k(t, t ′) is a kernel encoding temporal correlations. Given noisy observations yi = ζ(ti) + η with η ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> y

),the posterior mean at a query time ˆt is 

ζ(ˆ t) = kt(ˆ t) Ktt + σ2 

> y

I−1 y, (2) where kt(ˆ t) denotes the covariance vector between the query time ˆt and the observation times ti, Ktt is the covariance matrix evaluated at the observation times. A sparse representation can be obtained by conditioning the GP on a reduced set of via-points Γ, which act as control variables for the trajectory. Updates to these conditioning variables induce globally smooth trajectory modifications due to the kernel structure. Furthermore, derivatives of the GP posterior can be computed analytically [15], providing direct access to velocity and acceleration profiles. 

B. Soft Actor-Critic 

Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [16] is a stochastic, off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm designed for continuous action spaces. SAC learns a policy by maximising the expected return while incorporating an entropy regularisation term to encourage exploration. The actor’s objective takes the form 

Lπ = E [α log π(a|s) − Q(s, a)] , (3) where s denotes the state, a the action sampled from the policy π, Q(s, a) is the state–action value function, and 

α is the temperature parameter controlling the strength of entropy regularisation. Entropy regularisation improves sta-bility and exploration in high-dimensional continuous control problems. 

C. Euclidean Distance Fields 

A Euclidean Distance Field (EDF) is a scalar field that models the surrounding environment as a surface or man-ifold, O ⊂ R3. Its boundary given by obstacles in the environment is defined by δO with an orientation dictated by its surface normals. The distance is given by, 

d(x) = min  

> o∈δO

∥x − o∥2, (4) where ∥ · ∥ 2 denotes the Euclidean norm. The scalar field 

d(x) is non-negative in free space and approaches zero at contact. Its gradient, ∇d(x) = ∂d (x) 

> ∂x

, points in the direction of maximal increase of clearance and thus provides a locally optimal obstacle-avoidance direction. Due to their smoothness and differentiability properties, distance fields are widely used in motion planning and optimisation-based control. IV. D IST -GPRL: S AFETY -AWARE SKILL ADAPTATION 

This section presents the formulation for the proposed safety-aware skill adaptation pipeline. An overview of our approach is shown in Fig. 2. 

A. Problem Formulation 

We first formulate the skill adaptation problem similar to the work of [4]. Let us consider a demonstrated skill ζ(t) = 

{(p1, r1), (p2, r2), . . . , (pn, rn)}, where pi ∈ R3 and ri ∈

R3, parameterised with six separate GPs using a sparse set of via-points as 

p(t) = kt(t) Ktt + σ2 

> y

I−1 Γp,

r(t) = kt(t) Ktt + σ2 

> y

I−1 Γr , (5) where Γp and Γr are the via-point vectors for position and orientation, respectively. Let Γts ∈ RN ×6 denote the full via-point set at RL step ts, where N denotes the total number of via-points. Given a new TC, the agent must find an adapted trajectory ζ′(t) through modifications of these via-points ∆Γ

such that: 1) Kinematics retention: the demonstrated velocity pro-file is preserved, min ∥ ˙ζ′(t) − ˙ζ(t)∥.2) Safety: the adapted trajectory remains collision-free, 

d(p(t)) > 0, ∀t, where d(·) denotes a differentiable EDF. We formulate the skill adaptation as an MDP M =(X , A, P, r, γ ), where the agent observes and only updates a local subset of via-points at each RL step. A phase variable 

ϕts ∈ [0 , 1] determines an active temporal window Wts ⊂{1, . . . , N } with |W ts | = L, where L denotes the window size. Each RL time step ts corresponds to the adaptation of the contiguous trajectory segment defined by Wts .At time step ts, the state sts ∈ X is defined as 

sts =

h

ΓWts  

> ts

, cts , eo(ts), eg (ts), ϕ ts

i

, (6) where ΓWts  

> ts

∈ RL×6 are the windowed via-points, cts ∈

RL are the corresponding EDF clearances evaluated at the windowed via-points, eo(ts) denotes the distance vector from end-effector to the object to be manipulated, and eg (ts) is the distance vector from end-effector to the goal. At each time step, the policy outputs a raw corrective action ˜ats ∈ RL×6 for the active window. To correlate up-dates using the GP prior, we precompute a global correlation operator 

S = Ktt (Ktt + λI)−1 , where Ktt ∈ RN ×N , (7) and apply the principal submatrix SWts ∈ RL×L indexed by 

Wts to obtain the correlated corrective actions 

∆Γts = SWts ˜ats , (8) where λ > 0 controls the strength of action correlation. Thus, the via-points evolve as 

˜ΓWts  

> ts

= ΓWts  

> ts

+ ∆ Γts , (9) where the updated via-points ˜ΓWts  

> ts

define the adapted tra-jectory ζ′(t) through Eq. (5). 

B. Action Biasing with Cosine Similarity and HAP Prior 

To preserve the demonstrated kinematic structure and guide exploration toward safe regions, we augment the SAC actor objective with two regularisation terms: (i) a cosine similarity loss on trajectory kinematics, and (ii) a HAP-based safe-subspace prior. 

a) Cosine Similarity Loss: Given the adapted trajectory 

ζ′(t) under via-point updates ∆Γts , we query its velocity and acceleration profiles using the GP derivative maps. Let 

˙ζ(t), ¨ζ(t) denote the demonstrated velocity and acceleration, and ˙ζ′(t), ¨ζ′(t) the adapted counterparts. We define the similarity loss over trajectory time as 

Lsim = λv 1 − 1

T

X

> t

cos 

 ˙ζ′(t), ˙ζ(t)

!

+ λa

1

T

X

> t

¨ζ′(t) − ¨ζ(t) 1

.

(10) where T denotes the number of queried trajectory samples. This term constrains the policy to retain the demonstrated motion directionality and smoothness while adapting via-points. 

b) HAP Safe-Subspace Prior: Let Csafe denote the set of safe Cartesian positions derived from the HAP traversable subspace. Given a sparse set of queried Cartesian positions 

{xq }Nq 

> q=1

sampled along ζ′(t), we minimise a soft-min dis-tance to Csafe :

Lhap = 1

NqNq

X

> q=1

−τ log X 

> y∈kNN( xq)

exp 



− ∥xq − y∥

τ



,

(11) where Nq denotes the number of sampled trajectory query points and kNN( xq ) returns the k nearest neighbours in Csafe .

c) Final Actor Objective: The complete actor loss is 

Lπ = E[α log π(ats |sts ) − Qmin (sts , ats )] + λsim Lsim + λhap Lhap . (12) This formulation jointly promotes return maximisation, kinematic retention, and safety-aware exploration in via-point space. 

C. Safety-aware Policy Exploration 

To embed safety-awareness in policy search, we employ dense distance-based reward shaping to discourage unsafe adaptation 

rts 

> sd

= − β X

> i

1d(xits ) < d min 



d(xits ) + ϵ , (13) where xits denotes sampled points on the end-effector at time step ts, d(·) is the EDF, dmin is the safety margin, β > 

0 is a scaling coefficient, and ϵ > 0 avoids singularities as d(·) → 0. This hyperbolic formulation yields a rapidly increasing penalty near contact, providing a stronger safety gradient compared to linear shaping. Furthermore, we compute EDF gradients at the active via-points ΓWts  

> ts

, which define locally safe directions. Based on this, we define a gradient-alignment reward 

rts 

> ga

= 1

L

> L

X

> j=1

cos 



∆Γ(j) 

> ts

, ∇d(v(j) 

> ts

)



, (14) where v(j) 

> ts

denotes the Cartesian position of the j-th via-point in ΓWts  

> ts

, and ∆Γ(j) 

> ts

is the corresponding update component. A higher value reflects actions aligned with obstacle-avoidance directions. The complete reward at time step ts is defined as 

rts = rts 

> tc

+ rts 

> sd

+ λga rts

> ga

, (15) where rts 

> tc

denotes the task completion reward, λga >

0 balances the influence of gradient-aligned exploration. This formulation simultaneously encourages task comple-tion, clearance maintenance, and safety-directed exploration during policy learning. Note that, although the distance penalty and gradient-aligned reward encourage collision-free behaviour, they do not provide formal safety guarantees. D. Training Details 

Algorithm 1 summarises the training procedure of Dist-GPRL. We initialise the EDF d(·) from the workspace model and update it online according to the moving obstacle state during rollouts. At the beginning of each episode, the demonstrated trajectory is parameterised using a GP and conditioned on the current TC to obtain the initial via-point set Γ0.At each time step ts, the active via-point window Wts

is determined from the phase variable ϕts . The policy observes the windowed via-points ΓWts  

> ts

together with EDF clearances and task vectors, and outputs a corrective action. The correlated update ∆Γts is applied to the active window via GP conditioning, yielding updated via-points that define the adapted trajectory segment. This segment is executed in the environment to obtain rewards and the next state. One transition is stored per time step, and the policy is updated using the safety-shaped reward and the regularised actor objective in Eq. (12). 

Algorithm 1 Dist-GPRL: Safety-Aware Skill Adaptation 

Require: Demonstration ζ(t)

Ensure: Adapted trajectory ˆζ(t) 

> 1:

Initialise actor πθ , critics Qϕ1 , Q ϕ2 and replay buffer  

> 2:

Initialise Euclidean Distance Field d(·) 

> 3:

for each episode do  

> 4:

Reset via-points to demonstration set Γ0 

> 5:

Condition GP on observed task configuration T C  

> 6:

for each RL time step ts do  

> 7:

Update EDF using current obstacle state  

> 8:

Determine active window Wts from phase ϕts 

> 9:

Propose corrective update ˜ats ∼ πθ 

> 10:

Formulate correlated update ∆Γts = SWts ˜ats 

> 11:

Update via-points and condition GP posterior  

> 12:

Execute adapted trajectory segment  

> 13:

Compute task and safety rewards  

> 14:

Store transition and update SAC parameters  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Query GP updated by best policy to obtain ˆζ(t) 

> 18:

return ˆζ(t)

E. Hyperparameter Selection 

In our implementation, the GP parameterisation consists of 15 via-points in each axis, resulting in 90 via-points across the six axes. We use three overlapping windows of 

L = 5 six-DoF via-points with one-point overlap, resulting in a 30-dimensional action per RL step. Smaller windows limit adaptation flexibility, whereas larger windows approach global adaptation and can reduce learning stability; the overlap maintains continuity between adjacent segments. The covariance transformation uses λ = 10 −2, where smaller val-ues retain more of the raw action and larger values produce smoother but more conservative updates. We set λhap = 0 .2

and λsim = 0 .5; increasing these values strengthens safe-subspace guidance and kinematic retention, respectively, but  

> Fig. 3. Dynamic cube pushing (left) and dynamic bar removal (right) simulated in PyBullet

excessive regularisation can restrict the deviations required for task adaptation. For the reward function, λga is set as 0.2 to provide more importance to the task completion while avoiding local collisions. All values were selected empirically and kept fixed across experiments. V. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

We first validate our approach in simulation using two separate tasks. Both experiments have been conducted in PyBullet [17], with a single expert demonstration for each task. The DBM task is additionally replicated on hardware. In both cases, a Universal Robots UR5e has been used with different custom end-effectors suitable for each task (See Fig. 3). 

a) Dynamic Cube Pushing (DCP): The robot equipped with a shovel has to push a moving cube towards a goal region, while avoiding a dynamic obstacle. The cube’s initial pose is varied up to 20 cm on the xy -plane from the given demonstration. The start pose of the obstacle can also vary up to 10 cm. 

b) Dynamic Bar Manipulation (DBM): The robot, equipped with a hook end effector, must pick up and remove one of two bars from a moving conveyor belt, while avoiding collisions with the other bar or conveyor rollers. The start poses of both bars also vary up to 20 cm along the xy -plane on the conveyor. We further test the DBM task on hardware where the policy trained on simulation is transferred in one shot. We leverage the IDMP [12] framework to obtain a dynamically updating distance field that is used to query via-point distance values. We use ArUco markers to detect and find the bars’ locations in the camera frame. We then transform them to the robot’s base frame, utilising an ArUco marker placed near the robot base with a known transform. 

B. Baselines 

We benchmark our approach against 5 algorithms. 

GPRL : The original structured GPRL framework [4], where SAC directly updates all via-points without window-ing, action correlation, or distance-based shaping. 

ProMP-RRL : Following [18], we fit an object-centric ProMP over 20 demonstrated trajectories, followed by a Fig. 4. Baseline GPRL fails to avoid collision (left). Our proposed approach avoids collisions and proceeds to pick up the bar successfully (right). 

residual reinforcement learning (RRL) [19] based adaptation over the nominal trajectory offset by the observed object with SAC. 

Dist-GPRL-Global : Global via-point adaptation with both distance-based reward shaping and HAP prior biasing, but without windowed adaptation or correlation transformation. 

GPRL-D : Windowed adaptation with correlation transfor-mation and distance-based rewards, but without the HAP safe-subspace prior. 

GPRL-H : Windowed adaptation with correlation transfor-mation and HAP prior, but without distance-based rewards. Note that each framework utilises the same SAC configu-ration as proposed in [16]. 

C. Simulation Results 

Our simulated experiment consists of 100 runs with vary-ing TCs, where both the object to be manipulated and the obstacle are moving. The cube pushing task has a wall and a plane as static obstacles, and another moving cube as a dynamic obstacle. Similarly, in bar manipulation, the conveyor rollers and rails act as static obstacles, whereas another moving bar is considered as a dynamic obstacle. The agent must learn to manipulate the objects in question without colliding with any of the static or dynamic obstacles. Success rate, collision rate, and the 5th-percentile episode-wise minimum clearance are reported in Table I. In both tasks, the baseline GPRL performs poorly with low success rates, the highest collision rates and very low minimum clear-ance. When we apply our framework and propose updates to all the via-points, and in turn, modify the GP parameterised skill globally, the results showcase improvement over the baseline GPRL. However, the learned policy still leads to collisions and can fail to manipulate the object. In contrast, windowed operations perform better in com-parison. GPRL-D, operating without the HAP subspace prior, marginally prioritises safety over success. This leads to high minimum clearances, however, with slightly less success. GPRL-H achieves results comparable to GPRL-D; however, on its own, it is not capable enough to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Whereas, our proposed approach achieves the highest success rates, reaching 89% in DCP and 98% in DBM. It also attains a 1% collision rate in DBM and the second-lowest collision rate in DCP (5%). Furthermore, the method maintains competitive minimum clearance across both tasks, demonstrating its ability to balance task success with safe interaction in cluttered environments. We further evaluate the impact of the HAP subspace and the covariance-based action transformation on learning performance. All experiments are conducted across three random seeds, and we report the success rate, collision rate, and episode return over training steps. Fig. 5 shows that incorporating the HAP subspace consistently yields higher success rates, lower collision frequencies, and higher episode returns compared to the variant without the HAP subspace. A similar trend is observed in Fig. 6, where the proposed covariance-based transformation improves learning stability and sample efficiency, leading to better performance earlier in training compared to the direct action update baseline. Runtime was measured over the three adaptation windows on an 11th-generation Intel Core i7-1185G7 processor with 16 GB DDR4 RAM. Each window required approximately 4 ms for distance-field queries, 2 ms for local GP condition-ing, and 0.5 ms for policy inference, yielding approximately 19.3 ms of computational adaptation time per episode. These results support real-time adaptation feasibility.                                             

> TABLE I SIMULATION RESULTS ACROSS TASKS
> DCP DBM Method Success Collision MinCl (m) Success Collision MinCl (m) GPRL 18% 68% 0.001 44% 54% 0.001 ProMP-RRL 5% 3%0.051 11% 8% 0.036 Dist-GPRL-Global 64% 30% 0.004 78% 11% 0.003 GPRL-D 77% 9% 0.035 93% 3% 0.04
> GPRL-H 79% 12% 0.01 90% 7% 0.029 Dist-GPRL (Ours) 89 %5% 0.017 98 %1%0.037

D. Hardware Results 

The hardware experiments on the DBM task across 10 episodes are reported in Table II. Each trial corresponds to a full execution of the task under randomly initialised bar positions, providing a practical evaluation of robustness under real-world variability. The results exhibit trends similar to those observed in the simulation. Both GPRL and ProMP-RRL achieve poor success rates. GPRL policy fails to avoid collisions and operate within the cluttered space to remove the bar (Fig. 4). ProMP-RRL follows a conservative strategy that avoids congested regions, resulting in very few colli-sions and relatively high minimum clearance. However, this behaviour leads to minimal interaction with the bar, resulting in zero successful removals. Our proposed approach with global adaptation also falls short of the best performance. While it maintains low colli-sion rates, it fails to successfully pick up the bar in half of the trials. Both GPRL-D and GPRL-H achieve moderate success, reflecting their ability to incorporate distance awareness and safe exploration, respectively. However, as also observed in 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Rate Success 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Collision 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 050 100 Episode return 

Without HAP subspace With HAP subspace Fig. 5. Effect of the HAP subspace on learning across 3 seeds. HAP subspace accelerates convergence, improves final task success, and reduces collision frequency throughout training. 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Rate Success 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Collision 0 10000 20000 30000 Training steps 50 

050 100 150 Episode return 

Without covariance transform With covariance transform  

> Fig. 6. Effect of the covariance-based action transform on learning across 3 seeds. Covariance transformation over the raw actions improves stability with better final task success, reduced collision frequency and higher episodic returns.

the simulation, combining these components yields the best performance. Our proposed framework achieves the high-est success rate while maintaining low collision frequency, demonstrating the benefit of jointly leveraging distance field guidance and structured exploration for reliable real-world manipulation. 

E. Discussion 

Experimental results indicate that adapting the full set of via-points leads to high training instability. This is charac-terised by suboptimal policies that lead to low success rates and high collisions. Despite incorporating the HAP subspace prior and distance-based reward shaping, the agent remains unable to provide actions that result in collision-free paths. A primary driver for this unstable behaviour is the high-dimensional action space since the learnt policy adapts the full set of via-points simultaneously at each update. This in-troduces a credit assignment problem where the agent cannot discern which specific via-point modifications contributed                        

> TABLE II HARDWARE RESULTS ON THE DBM T ASK
> Method Success Collision MinCl (m) GPRL 10% 70% 0.001 ProMP-RRL 0% 20% 0.03
> Dist-GPRL-Global 50% 20% 0.002 GPRL-D 70% 20% 0.027 GPRL-H 60% 30% 0.022 Dist-GPRL (Ours) 90 %10 %0.027

to a collision or a successful motion, thereby hindering policy convergence. Residual learning leads to opposing results, where the policy finds a suboptimal solution to avoid collision penalties, despite it being positively incentivised towards interacting with the manipulated object. Although ProMP-RRL achieves very low collisions and one of the best minimum clearance values, its success rate is poor. In contrast, operating locally on nearby via-points of the GP facilitates significantly better credit assignment. Distance-based rewards provide beneficial signals for col-lision avoidance, whereas the HAP subspace prior enables more efficient exploration and faster convergence, as shown in Fig. 5. Both GPRL-D and GPRL-H outperform global frameworks such as GPRL or Dist-GPRL-global. However, in isolation, these components exhibit specific behaviours; without the HAP prior, distance-based rewards show lower success rates in the cube pushing task, although with a lower number of collisions. Whereas, without the distance field guidance, the HAP subspace alone is insufficient to ensure collision-free behaviour. When combined, these mechanisms complement each other. The HAP prior encourages the exploration of safe regions in the action space, facilitating high returns and accelerating convergence (Fig. 5); while distance field re-wards provide a precise metric of safety for each ac-tion, reducing collisions. To further stabilise learning, the covariance-coupled smoothing over the actions ensures that via-points move in unison within each windowed batch. This approach preserves the geometric and kinematic structure of the demonstrated task, leading to better policies during exploration (Fig. 6). While this work enhances skill adaptation for GP-parameterised trajectories, it also highlights the inherent limitations of GPs, particularly regarding extrapolation. In the DCP task, the adaptation of via-points can accentuate these issues, leading to erratic movements toward the end of the trajectory. While the DCP task is simpler than DBM, its proximity to the plane can often lead to collisions. Future work will investigate strategies to mitigate this issue by stabilising GP extrapolation with additional boundary constraints. Furthermore, the GP conditioning on the new TCs relies on accurate sensor information and does not take into consideration the sensor noise and the uncertainty in the estimated distance field. Future work will take into considera-tion the uncertainty associated with the sensor measurements and noise. Lastly, since we rely on a learned policy for collision avoidance under varying TCs, our current formula-tion improves empirical safety but does not provide formal safety guarantees. Future work will look into the prospect of constrained reinforcement learning together with explicit safety mechanisms towards more reliable deployment. We will also explore applications of the proposed framework in real-world industrial applications. 

F. Conclusion 

This work presented Dist-GPRL, a safety-aware frame-work that extends GP-based skill adaptation to cluttered and dynamic environments through local windowed updates, covariance-transformed actions, and complementary HAP-subspace and distance field guidance. We demonstrate that the inclusion of distance-based rewards as well as the HAP subspace prior significantly improves learning and reduces collisions in the presence of moving obstacles. We further showcase how the GP covariance can be used to transform raw RL actions to regularise exploration and attain improved adaptation stability and performance. Across two dynamic manipulation tasks, including real-world robot execution, Dist-GPRL achieved the strongest overall balance between task success, collision avoidance, and kinematic retention among the evaluated methods. REFERENCES [1] T. Davchev, K. S. Luck, M. Burke, F. Meier, S. Schaal, and S. Ra-mamoorthy, “Residual learning from demonstration: Adapting dmps for contact-rich manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4488–4495, 2022. [2] I. Nematollahi, E. Rosete-Beas, A. R¨ ofer, T. Welschehold, A. Valada, and W. Burgard, “Robot skill adaptation via soft actor-critic gaussian mixture models,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 8651–8657, IEEE, 2022. [3] A. Paraschos, C. Daniel, J. R. Peters, and G. Neumann, “Probabilistic movement primitives,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 26, 2013. [4] A. K. M. N. Haque, F. Sukkar, S. Sujipto, C. Le Gentil, M. G. Carmichael, and T. Vidal-Calleja, “Towards robot skill learning and adaptation with gaussian processes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01480 ,2026. [5] A. N. Haque, F. Sukkar, L. Tanz, M. G. Carmichael, and T. Vidal-Calleja, “Constrained bootstrapped learning for few-shot robot skill adaptation,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 5189–5194, IEEE, 2024. [6] K. Long, C. Qian, J. Cort´ es, and N. Atanasov, “Learning barrier functions with memory for robust safe navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4931–4938, 2021. [7] P. Liu, K. Zhang, D. Tateo, S. Jauhri, Z. Hu, J. Peters, and G. Chal-vatzaki, “Safe reinforcement learning of dynamic high-dimensional robotic tasks: navigation, manipulation, interaction,” in 2023 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 9449– 9456, IEEE, 2023. [8] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynamical movement primitives: learning attractor models for motor behaviors,” Neural computation , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013. [9] D. A. Reynolds et al. , “Gaussian mixture models.,” Encyclopedia of biometrics , vol. 741, no. 659-663, p. 3, 2009. [10] T. D. Barfoot, C. H. Tong, and S. S¨ arkk¨ a, “Batch continuous-time trajectory estimation as exactly sparse gaussian process regression.,” in Robotics: Science and Systems , vol. 10, pp. 1–10, Citeseer, 2014. [11] F. Sukkar, J. Wakulicz, K. M. B. Lee, W. Zhi, and R. Fitch, “Multi-query robotic manipulator task sequencing with gromov-hausdorff approximations,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. [12] U. Ali, L. Wu, A. M¨ uller, F. Sukkar, T. Kaupp, and T. Vidal-Calleja, “Interactive distance field mapping and planning to enable human-robot collaboration,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 10850–10857, 2024. [13] C. Zhang, S. Sun, K. Liu, C. Zhou, X. Zhao, M. Tan, and Y. Huang, “A reactive framework for whole-body motion planning of mobile manipulators combining reinforcement learning and sdf-constrained quadratic programming,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23975 , 2025. [14] P. Liu, D. Tateo, H. B. Ammar, and J. Peters, “Robot reinforcement learning on the constraint manifold,” in Conference on Robot Learning ,pp. 1357–1366, PMLR, 2022. [15] S. S¨ arkk¨ a, “Linear operators and stochastic partial differential equa-tions in gaussian process regression,” in Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2011, 14-17 , pp. 151–158, Springer, 2011. [16] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 1861– 1870, PMLR, 2018. [17] E. Coumans and Y. Bai, “Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics and machine learning,” 2016. [18] J. Carvalho, D. Koert, M. Daniv, and J. Peters, “Adapting object-centric probabilistic movement primitives with residual reinforcement learn-ing,” in 2022 IEEE-RAS 21st International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , pp. 405–412, IEEE, 2022. [19] T. Johannink, S. Bahl, A. Nair, J. Luo, A. Kumar, M. Loskyll, J. A. Ojea, E. Solowjow, and S. Levine, “Residual reinforcement learning for robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03201 , 2018.