Title: End-to-end QP-based policies: A unified perspective on robust control and robot learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.31905v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 00:21:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# End-to-end QP-based policies: A unified perspective on robust control and robot learning 

Fausto Vega 1, Priyanka Supraja Balaji 2, Chase Dunaway 1, Joe Koszut 1

Jon Arrizabalaga 1, and Zachary Manchester 1

Abstract — We present an end-to-end QP-based policy frame-work that enables systematic policy construction with minimal domain-specific design, while preserving the transparency and interpretability of model-based control. The proposed policy representation supports both domain-randomized model-based auto-tuning, where policy parameters are optimized over dis-tributions of disturbances and model variations, and black-box policy construction, where the problem is formulated in terms of a (possibly) unknown model without requiring explicit notions of states, inputs, or the underlying system dynamics. We establish connections to existing policy representations and control paradigms, including robust control, multilayer perceptrons, and robot learning, and interpret our end-to-end QP policies as a common abstraction of these approaches. We validate the resulting framework in both simulation and hardware, demonstrating a broad range of applications span-ning robustness, automatic policy tuning, and control under unknown system dynamics. 

Website : https://roboticexplorationlab.org/e2eqp/ 

I. INTRODUCTION Constrained optimization sits at the very core of robotics. It appears across virtually all its disciplines, including plan-ning, control, state estimation, simulation, and many others. The early acrobatic maneuvers of Atlas and the rocket landings of SpaceX are a testament to the fundamental role of convex optimization in some of the field’s most remarkable achievements [1], [2]. Despite these achievements, the role of convex optimiza-tion within robotics has changed substantially in recent years. This shift reflects a transformation of the robotics landscape: modular architectures are giving way to unified end-to-end pipelines, while analytical models are complemented by—or replaced with—black-box representations, such as simulators or world models, whose inner state and derivatives may be unavailable to the user [3], [4]. In this new setting, convex optimization is no longer used only to compute optimal solutions efficiently. Increasingly, the optimization problem itself becomes part of what must be adapted to the task and the data at hand. A key enabler of this transition has been differentiabil-ity [5]. Recent methods not only solve convex optimization problems efficiently, but also differentiate their solutions with respect to the problem data [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. This  

> 1Authors are with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

{vegaf, chasead7,jkoszut,jonarri,zacm }@mit.edu              

> 2Author is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

psupraja@caltech.edu 

makes the parameters of an optimization problem quantities that can be tuned through downstream gradient descent, bringing optimization into the end-to-end learning loop. Differentiable optimization has fueled a rapidly growing interface between optimization and learning. The impact has been particularly visible in low-level control, where model-predictive control (MPC) is increasingly treated not as a fixed controller, but as a component that can be adapted from data. Existing approaches range from directly differentiating through MPC to tune its costs and constraints [12], to augmenting it with learned residuals [13], and integrating it within reinforcement learning (RL) architectures [14], [15]. Similar ideas have been extended to differentiable control barrier functions [16], [17] and learned optimization methods tailored to specific problem distributions [18]. However, in most of the approaches cited above, optimiza-tion remains one component within a broader architecture: a differentiable layer, an MPC controller with learned parame-ters, or a mechanism for imposing structure and constraints. In parallel, work has sought deeper connections between model-based and data-driven control from theoretical and behavioral perspectives [19]. Here, we pursue a comple-mentary question: rather than combining separately designed model-based and learning components, can the optimization problem itself serve as the policy representation? And can this representation expose common structure across control and learning? 

We show that it can. We formulate the optimization problem itself as the policy representation, with its defining parameters learned end-to-end from downstream objectives. This formulation accommodates both model-based control, where analytical structure is retained and tuned over distri-butions of models and disturbances, and black-box control, where policies are learned directly from input-output behav-ior without explicit notions of states, inputs, or dynamics. It also exposes common structure across seemingly different paradigms, including robust control, multilayer perceptrons, and domain-randomized robot learning. In this work, we instantiate this perspective using Quadratic Programs (QPs), while the underlying ideas extend naturally to more general conic convex formulations [20]. In particular, our contributions are: 1) An end-to-end differentiable QP-based policy repre-sentation that enables systematic policy construction with minimal domain-specific design, while preserving the transparency and interpretability of model-based control. arXiv:2609.31905v1 [cs.RO] 25 Sep 2026 2) Connections between our QP-based policy representa-tion and established paradigms in control and learn-ing, including robust control ( H2 and H∞), machine learning (multilayer perceptrons), and robot learning (domain-randomized reinforcement learning). 3) A broad portfolio of simulation and real-world experi-ments showcasing the aforementioned connections, as well as the ease of use and deployment of the proposed framework. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the end-to-end QP-based policy rep-resentation, then Section III establishes connections to the aforementioned control and learning paradigms. Section IV presents a set of simulation and hardware experiments to demonstrate our results on practical robotics problems. Fi-nally, Section V summarizes our conclusions . II. END-TO-END QP BASED POLICIES We consider policies whose control action is obtained from the solution of a parameterized quadratic program. Rather than fixing a single QP structure, we allow the formulation to vary depending on the problem. In this work, we consider formulations ranging from a projection QP to a trajectory-optimization QP with predictive dynamics, horizon coupling, costs, and constraints. These different structures induce different classes of control laws. Given the current state x, we define the QP policy through 

z⋆(x; θ) = arg min 

> z

12 z⊤Hθ z + ( Fθ x + qθ )⊤ z

s.t. Gθ z ≤ hθ ,Eθ z = bθ ,

(1) with the control action recovered as 

u = πQP  

> θ

(x) = Cθ z⋆(x; θ) + dθ . (2) Here, z represents the QP decision variable and θ collects the learnable parameters defining the objective, constraints, and the control from the QP solution. For a given QP formulation, the parameters θ determine a particular control law within the QP policy class. We optimize these parameters directly from closed-loop task performance. Consider a plant with dynamics 

xt+1 = fp(xt, u t, w t), (3) where p represents the plant parameters and wt is an exoge-nous disturbance. Applying the QP policy recursively yields 

xt+1 = fp



xt, π QP  

> θ

(xt), w t



. (4) For an initial condition x0, plant instance p, and disturbance sequence w = {wt}T −1 

> t=0

, the resulting closed-loop trajectory is evaluated through the task objective 

J(θ; x0, p, w ) =  

> T−1

X

> t=0

ℓ(xt, u t) + ℓf (xT ), (5) where T is the simulation horizon, ℓ is the stage loss, and 

ℓf is the terminal loss. Training is performed over a batch of M closed-loop roll-outs. One possible choice of outer objective is the empirical mean of the rollout objectives, 

Lmean (θ) = 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

J



θ; x(i)0 , p (i), w (i)

. (6) The sampled quantities can be varied according to the desired training objective. Sampling x(i)0 trains the policy over a distribution of initial conditions, sampling p(i) introduces domain randomization over plant uncertainty, and sampling 

w(i) exposes the policy to exogenous disturbances. These sources of variation can be considered independently or jointly. The differentiability of the QP and plant rollout allows gradients of the outer objective to be propagated through all the closed-loop trajectories in the batch. Each rollout i

produces an individual trajectory loss J(i), which is then combined through the chosen outer objective L. The resulting computation graph can be summarized as 

θ −→ ; z⋆(i) 

> t

−→ ; u(i) 

> t

−→ ; x(i) 

> t+1

−→ ; J(i) −→ ; L, (7) where i = 1 , . . . , M indexes the rollouts and t = 0 , . . . , T −1

indexes time. This enables direct optimization of the policy parameters using gradient-based methods. The outer objective applied to the rollout losses can be chosen independently of the underlying QP structure. Replacing the empirical mean in (6) with a risk-sensitive or worst-case operator changes the criterion used to select the control law while leaving the QP structure unchanged. The separation between QP structure and outer learning objective is central to our framework: the QP specifies which policies can be represented, while the outer objective determines which policy is learned. We use this distinction in the next section to establish connections with neural-network policies and robust-control objectives. III. QP POLICIES ACROSS CONTROL AND LEARNING 

A. Equivalence to Single-Hidden-Layer Neural Networks 

The projection QP provides a direct connection between QP-based policies and neural-network policies. In particular, the ReLU activation can be represented exactly as the Eu-clidean projection onto the nonnegative orthant. Consider a single-hidden-layer ReLU policy 

πReLU (x) = W2 ReLU( W1x + b1) + b2, (8) where W1, W2, b1, and b2 are the network parameters. The hidden activation can equivalently be obtained as the solution of the projection QP 

z⋆(x) = arg min 

> z≥0

12 ∥z − (W1x + b1)∥22 . (9) The solution of (9) is 

z⋆(x) = ReLU( W1x + b1), (10) 0 5 10 15 20             

> K1(position gain)
> 234567
> K2 (velocity gain) gains during training, cost weights only ( Aθ,Bθpinned)
> mean over bank →H2
> max over bank →H∞
> common start θ0
> classical H2(DARE) classical H∞(central)

(a) Recovery of the feedback gain Kθ under 

H2- and H∞-type objectives. 34.0 34.5 35.0 35.5 36.0    

> average cost over the uncertainty set
> 39.5 40.0 40.5 41.0 41.5 42.0
> worst-case cost over the uncertainty set  mean
> β= 0.1
> β= 0.3
> β= 1 max
> average vs. worst-case cost for each training loss (each marker is one controller)
> best static gain for each loss QP, internal model frozen QP, internal model learned

(b) Tradeoff between average- and worst-case performance under entropic risk over model uncertainty. −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0        

> uncertain plant parameter δ∈ [−1, 1]
> 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.0
> peak disturbance amplification  γ(K; δ) worst case 8.83
> Peak disturbance amplification across the uncertainty set
> nominal H∞(designed at δ= 0)
> H∞over | δ| ≤ 1 (classical LMI) differentiable QP (sampled) 8.36 / 8.35 (within 0.16 %)

(c) Worst-case disturbance amplification across the uncertain plant family 

Fig. 1: Robust-control connections of the proposed QP policy on a double integrator regulation task. (a) Disturbance uncertainty: optimizing the outer objective approximates H2- and H∞-type feedback gains. (b) Model uncertainty: entropic risk interpolates between average- and worst-case performance. (c) Combined model and disturbance uncertainty: the learned QP policy is compared with nominal H∞ and worst case H∞ under plant uncertainty. so the corresponding QP policy satisfies 

πQP (x) = W2z⋆(x) + b2 = πReLU (x). (11) Thus, a single-hidden-layer ReLU policy is a special case of the QP policy formulation introduced in (1)–(2) [21]. The projection QP and the corresponding single-hidden-layer ReLU network therefore have the same expressive capacity under this parameterization. This equivalence also provides a direct demonstration of end-to-end QP learning of a piecewise-affine control law, which we illustrate on a nonlinear cartpole swing-up task in Section IV. 

B. Recovering Robust Control Objectives 

We next connect the proposed framework to classical robust-control objectives in the special case of an uncon-strained linear time-invariant (LTI) system. We do so by isolating the effect of the outer objective from the plant and QP structure. To facilitate understanding, we accompany the discussion throughout this section with an illustrative double-integrator example. Consider a batch containing plant instances p(i) and dis-turbance realizations w(j). Each closed-loop rollout produces a loss 

Jij (θ) = J



θ; p(i), w (j)

, (12) which we combine through the nested objective 

L(θ) = ρp

n

ρw



{Jij (θ)}Mj=1 

o Ni=1 



. (13) Here, ρw determines how performance is aggregated over ex-ogenous disturbances, while ρp determines how performance is aggregated over model uncertainty. The QP policy is then optimized according to 

θ⋆ = arg min 

θ L(θ). (14) For this analysis, we use the trajectory-optimization QP 

min 

ˆx0: H , u 0: H−1

H−1X

t=0 

 ˆx⊤

t Qθ ˆxt + u⊤

t Rθ ut

 + ˆ x⊤

H Pθ ˆxH

s.t. ˆx0 = x, 

ˆxt+1 = Aθ ˆxt + Bθ ut.

(15) In the unconstrained LTI case, the first control action reduces to a linear state-feedback law 

πQP 

θ (x) = −Kθ x. (16) Thus, learning the QP parameters θ indirectly selects a feedback gain Kθ from the class induced by the QP pa-rameterization. We first consider disturbance uncertainty for a fixed plant 

xk+1 = Ax k + Bu k + Bwwk, (17) with performance signal 

ek =

"

Q1/2

e xk

R1/2

e uk

#

. (18) We evaluate the closed-loop response to a bank of sinusoidal disturbances spanning the discrete-time frequency range. For each frequency ωj , the squared frequency-response gain is approximated by 

Gj (θ) = 

P

k ∥e(j)

k ∥22

P

k ∥w(j)

k ∥22

. (19) A weighted average of these gains over frequency gives an 

H2-type objective [22], 

L2(θ) = 

M −1X

j=0 

αj Gj (θ), (20) where αj are normalized trapezoidal quadrature weights associated with the uniformly sampled frequencies ωj . For the H∞-type objective, we instead select the largest gain across the sampled frequencies, 

L∞(θ) = max   

> 0≤j≤M−1

Gj (θ). (21) As the frequency discretization is refined, these objec-tives approximate the squared H2 and H∞ norms of the closed-loop disturbance-to-performance map. Fig. 1a shows that optimizing the QP parameters under these two outer objectives approximates the corresponding classical feedback gains [23], [24] [25]. We next isolate uncertainty in the plant. Let Ji(θ) denote the closed-loop trajectory cost obtained on plant instance 

p(i). The operator ρp may then be chosen as the empiri-cal mean, the maximum, or an intermediate risk-sensitive objective. In particular, we use the entropic risk [26] 

Lβ (θ) = 1

β log 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

exp( βJ i(θ)) 

!

. (22) As β → 0, this objective approaches the mean plant cost, whereas increasing β progressively emphasizes high-cost plants and approaches the worst case as β → ∞ . Hence, 

β provides a continuous interpolation between average-case domain randomization and worst-case robust design. This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 1b. Finally, both uncertainty sources can be activated simul-taneously. Choosing 

ρw = max  

> j

, ρp = max  

> i

, (23) gives 

Lrob (θ) = max  

> i

max  

> j

Gij (θ), (24) which is a sampled approximation of the worst-case H∞

performance over an uncertain plant family. We compare this learned QP policy with H∞ design based on a common-Lyapunov-function LMI [27]. The classical formulation min-imizes a certified upper bound on worst-case disturbance amplification, whereas (24) directly minimizes its sampled value. The resulting worst-case performance over the uncer-tainty set is shown in Fig. 1c. The examples in Fig. 1 demonstrate that, under the restrictive unconstrained LTI setting, the proposed outer-learning formulation recovers several familiar robust-control objectives through the choice of ρw and ρp. Importantly, the QP policy representation itself is unchanged: the QP defines the class of admissible controllers, while the outer objective determines the desired notion of robustness. In Section IV, we use this same separation beyond the LTI setting to train constrained QP policies directly through nonlinear and uncertain robotic systems. 

C. Data-Driven Predictive Control 

The QP-policy abstraction also includes data-driven pre-dictive controllers, where future trajectories are represented directly from measured input-output data rather than through an explicit state-space model [28], [29]. Originally developed for LTI systems, these behavioral approaches have also been 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4     

> allowable landing radius (m)
> 020 40 60 80 100
> landings within radius (%)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 90 95 100 max 0.38 m max 1.40 m
> worst 10 % of landings
> DR no DR

Fig. 2: Percentage of landings within a specified landing radius for 1000 vehicles, with and without domain random-ization (DR). The inset highlights the upper landing-error tail. extended to nonlinear settings through local, lifted, and kernel-based representations [30], [31], [32]. This further illustrates the role of QP structure in defining the resulting feedback policy. Model-based predictive control constrains future trajectories through an explicit dynam-ics model, data-driven predictive control constrains them through measured input-output data, and the projection QP introduced previously represents a piecewise-affine feedback policy. More generally, consistent with the end-to-end QP-policy formulation introduced in Section II, the QP structure determines the class of feedback laws that can be rep-resented, while the outer closed-loop objective determines which policy within that class is learned. More broadly, the same separation between QP structure and the outer objective also connects the QP-policy represen-tation to robot learning. Once the QP structure specifies the policy class, its parameters can be optimized directly from closed-loop experience. In particular, sampling initial con-ditions, disturbances, and model parameters during training leads to domain-randomized policy optimization, which we consider in one of our experiments. IV. EXPERIMENTS We divide our experimental validation into three parts, each highlighting a different capability of the proposed QP-policy framework. We first study robustness under model mismatch by using domain randomization to tune a con-strained MPC for a lunar lander with unmodeled slosh dynamics. We then examine the effect of QP structure on the resulting policy class through the projection-QP for-mulation, showing that a QP-based policy equivalent to a single-hidden-layer ReLU network can learn the nonlinear CartPole swing-up task. Finally, we evaluate the full end-to-end learning pipeline on hardware, including both state estimation and control, through deployment on a quadrotor. A. Robust Control with Domain Randomization 

To demonstrate the effect of domain randomization (DR) on control robustness, we consider a reusable lunar landing scenario. Reusability requires enough propellant to be carried not only for landing but also for ascent and return to orbit. Consequently, the lander must touch down with a large propellant mass fraction ( ≈ 0.5), resulting in non-negligible slosh dynamics. These dynamics are unobservable and thus cannot be included in a controller’s internal model. Hence, we seek to automate the design of an MPC that explicitly respects actuator limits while gaining implicit robustness to structural model mismatch through domain randomization. The lander is modeled as a planar rigid body with three degrees of freedom: vertical position z, horizontal position y,and orientation ϕ. An additional coordinate ψ is introduced to represent the first slosh mode, following the model of [33]. The simulated plant used for training incorporates all four coordinates (z, y, ϕ, ψ ) while the MPC is formulated only on the rigid subsystem (z, y, ϕ ). The control inputs are thrust magnitude and gimbal angle. Two controller variants are designed, sharing the same architecture, horizon, and constraint set. They differ only in the distribution used to train their running cost weights Q

and R and terminal cost P . The baseline controller is trained with a fixed slosh pendulum model while the DR controller is trained over a distribution of slosh mass, pendulum length, and damping ratio. Each controller is then evaluated on the same fleet of 1000 vehicles exposed to a dispersion in initial conditions and slosh model parameters. Fig. 2 reports the fraction of the vehicle fleet landing within a given distance from the landing target. The robust-ness of the DR controller is highlighted in the inset: its worst landing error is less than a third of the nominal controller’s largest error. Slosh parameters are difficult to identify during flight and change across the course of a mission. Random-izing them during the controller design phase costs nothing at run time since the deployed controller retains the same structure as the nominal one, while avoiding the tail errors that come with a nominal controller tuned around a single design point. This shows that domain randomization over sensitive and unknown parameters like slosh in a lunar lander can provide considerable robustness over using a single fixed model. We next examine the effect of QP structure on the class of feedback laws that can be learned. 

B. Single Hidden Layer ReLU Networks 

We evaluate the projection-QP policy on the nonlinear CartPole swing-up task to study the effect of QP structure on the resulting feedback law. The state is x = [ p, ˙p, θ, ˙θ]⊤,where p and ˙p describe the cart motion and θ and ˙θ the pendulum motion. The scalar input u is the horizontal force applied to the cart. This example highlights the role of QP structure in shaping the resulting policy class. A linear-MPC QP relies on a local linear model, making it well suited to regulation near the linearization point. The projection QP in Section III instead represents the same piecewise-affine policy class as a 0 1 2 3 4 5 6     

> pole angle θ(rad)
> −6
> −4
> −202468
> pole rate  ̇  θ (rad/s)
> learned QP PPO upright hanging

Fig. 3: Closed-loop phase portraits of the learned projection-QP policy and the single-hidden-layer ReLU policy from the same five initial conditions near the hanging equilibrium. Both policies generate swing-up trajectories and converge to the upright equilibrium. single-hidden-layer ReLU network without relying on a local predictive model. We optimize θ = {W1, b 1, W 2, b 2} from closed-loop performance over batches of B = 128 differentiable Cart-Pole rollouts from sampled initial conditions. We train with short horizons and augment the objective with a local LQR cost-to-go when the terminal state approaches the upright equilibrium. Figure 3 shows that the learned QP policy generates the energy required for swing-up and then stabilizes the pen-dulum about the upright equilibrium. Although each policy evaluation solves a convex QP, the nonnegativity constraints on the hidden variables become active in different regions of the state space, producing different affine feedback laws. The resulting piecewise-affine policy is therefore able to generate the nonlinear closed-loop behavior required for swing-up. This experiment shows that a QP policy can represent behavior beyond local regulation, with its capabilities deter-mined by the structure of the optimization problem. Using the projection formulation, the policy recovers the ReLU policy class and learns a controller that achieves nonlinear swing-up directly from closed-loop performance using the same end-to-end framework introduced in Section II. We next evaluate the framework on hardware, where state estimation and control are learned within the same end-to-end pipeline. 

C. End-to-end Learning in Hardware 

Finally, we showcase how our QP-based policy framework enables systematic policy construction with minimal domain-specific design. We evaluate the framework on hardware by incorporating state estimation and control into the differen-tiable closed-loop pipeline. Specifically, we consider position regulation of a Crazyflie quadrotor under a strong external wind disturbance, demonstrating end-to-end tuning of aFig. 4: Our end-to-end QP policy applied to a Crazyflie drone under a 5 m /s crosswind generated by an industrial fan with a flow-conditioning rack. Estimator, offset-compensation, and cost parameters are learned end to end, removing manual tuning and outperforming the hand-tuned baselines. structured QP policy together with a disturbance observer. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 4. A Crazyflie quadrotor flies in a motion-capture environment while ex-posed to a 5 m /s crosswind generated by an industrial fan 1

operating at full speed. A flow-conditioning rack is used to produce a more repeatable wind field. The Crazyflie begins approximately 0.5 m from the fan and flies to a target position 1.9 m downstream, where it maintains its position under the wind disturbance. To account for the persistent wind disturbance, we aug-ment the state with an estimated disturbance c and jointly estimate the state and disturbance using a Luenberger ob-server [34], [35]: 

xk+1 

ck+1 



=

 A E

03×3 I3×3

  xc



+

 B

03×3



u +

Lx

Lc



(y − ˆy)

(25) where x = [ p⊤, v ⊤]⊤ ∈ R6 contains position and velocity, 

u ∈ R3 contains roll, pitch, and total-thrust commands, and 

A and B are obtained by linearizing the quadrotor dynamics about hover. The matrix E = 03×3 (dt )I3×3

 maps the estimated disturbance into the translational dynamics, where 

dt is the timestep of the discrete dynamics. The disturbance is assumed constant over each prediction step, while Lx and 

Lc determine the state and disturbance corrections from the motion-capture position innovation y − ˆy.The estimated state and disturbance are provided to the trajectory-optimization QP, which is solved at 45 Hz . Its output is tracked by the Crazyflie’s onboard low-level con-troller running at 500 Hz . For the learned QP policy, the cost and disturbance-estimation parameters are optimized through differentiable closed-loop rollouts. The training loss is dominated by position-tracking error relative to the target.         

> 1The industrial fan is Venco MAC-48-316-C7-J1 (560W, 19500CFM) 012345678
> time (s)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
> position error  ‖pmeas  − ptarget ‖2 (m)
> Bryson (10 cm) Bryson (5 cm) End-to-end QP

Fig. 5: Closed-loop position error under crosswind for the learned end-to-end QP policy and two manually tuned MPC baselines based on Bryson’s rule. Thick curves show the mean over five trials, thin transparent curves show individual trials, and light shading marks the trial range. Training is performed using disturbances with randomized direction and magnitude, exposing the policy to a range of wind conditions. We compare the learned QP policy against two manually tuned MPC baselines using Bryson’s rule [36]. For both baselines, the disturbance observer gain is fixed to Lc =[1 , 1, 1] ⊤, while the QP policy disturbance observer gain is learned. The first controller is tuned for an allowable position deviation of 10 cm in each direction, while the second uses a more aggressive value of 5 cm. Increasing the position penalty further resulted in aggressive control and unreliable flight, providing a practical limit to manual tuning for this experiment. The results are shown in Fig. 5. Thick curves show the mean position error over five trials, thin transparent curves show individual trials, and light shading marks their range. The learned QP policy converges substantially faster than both manually tuned baselines and drives the steady-state position error to zero without manual cost tuning. The baseline controllers are also able to reject the wind disturbance through their disturbance observers, but converge more slowly and retain a residual position error throughout the flight. Overall, the learned policy achieves both faster disturbance rejection and improved steady-state regulation. The hardware experiment shows that jointly tuning the structured controller and disturbance estimator from random-ized closed-loop rollouts can substantially improve distur-bance rejection compared with manual cost tuning. Together with the preceding experiments, this shows that the same QP policy abstraction can span nonlinear policy learning, ro-bustness through domain randomization, and joint estimator-controller tuning on hardware. V. CONCLUSIONS We presented an end-to-end QP-based policy framework in which the optimization problem itself serves as a learnable policy representation. By separating the QP structure from the outer closed-loop objective, the framework provides a common perspective on robust control, neural-network policies, and domain-randomized robot learning while retain-ing the structure and interpretability of optimization-based control. Across simulation and hardware experiments, we showed that this abstraction can recover classical robust-ness objectives, learn nonlinear feedback policies, improve robustness to model mismatch, and jointly tune estimation and control under strong disturbances. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This material is based upon work supported by the Na-tional Science Foundation under Grand No. DGE2140739. REFERENCES 

[1] S. Kuindersma, F. Permenter, and R. Tedrake, “An ef-ficiently solvable quadratic program for stabilizing dy-namic locomotion,” in 2014 IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, 2014, pp. 2589–2594. [2] L. Blackmore, “Autonomous precision landing of space rockets,” in Frontiers of engineering: reports on leading-edge engineering from the 2016 symposium ,The Bridge Washington, DC, USA, vol. 46, 2016, pp. 15–20. [3] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and sys-tems , IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033. [4] B. Hou, G. Li, J. Jia, T. An, X. Guo, S. Leng, H. Geng, Y. Ze, T. Harada, P. Torr, et al., “World model for robot learning: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.00080 , 2026. [5] S. G. Krantz and H. R. Parks, The implicit function theorem: history, theory, and applications . Springer, 2002, vol. 202. [6] B. Amos and J. Z. Kolter, “Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks,” in Interna-tional conference on machine learning , PMLR, 2017, pp. 136–145. [7] A. Agrawal, B. Amos, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, S. Dia-mond, and J. Z. Kolter, “Differentiable convex op-timization layers,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 32, 2019. [8] K. Tracy and Z. Manchester, “On the differentiabil-ity of the primal-dual interior-point method,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11749 , 2024. [9] G. Bravo-Palacios, J. Zhang, Z. Pestrikov, B. Plancher, and T. Lew, “Turbompc: Fast, scalable, and differ-entiable model predictive control on the gpu,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.24039 , 2026. [10] J. Arrizabalaga, K. Tracy, and Z. Manchester, “A dif-ferentiable interior-point method in single precision,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17913 , 2026. [11] C. Holmes, F. D¨ umbgen, and T. D. Barfoot, “Sdprlay-ers: Certifiable backpropagation through polynomial optimization problems in robotics,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 41, pp. 4120–4138, 2025. [12] E. Adabag, M. Greiff, J. Subosits, and T. Lew, “Dif-ferentiable model predictive control on the gpu,” in In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,vol. 2026, 2026, pp. 132 305–132 323. [13] T. Salzmann, E. Kaufmann, J. Arrizabalaga, M. Pavone, D. Scaramuzza, and M. Ryll, “Real-time neural mpc: Deep learning model predictive control for quadrotors and agile robotic platforms,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2397–2404, 2023. [14] A. Romero, Y. Song, and D. Scaramuzza, “Actor-critic model predictive control,” in 2024 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, 2024, pp. 14 777–14 784. [15] R. Reiter, J. Hoffmann, D. Reinhardt, F. Messerer, K. Baumg¨ artner, S. Sawant, J. Boedecker, M. Diehl, and S. Gros, “Synthesis of model predictive control and reinforcement learning: Survey and classification,” 

Annual Reviews in Control , vol. 61, p. 101 045, 2026. [16] W. Xiao, T.-H. Wang, R. Hasani, M. Chahine, A. Amini, X. Li, and D. Rus, “Barriernet: Differentiable control barrier functions for learning of safe robot control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 2289–2307, 2023. [17] D. Morton and M. Pavone, “Safe, task-consistent manipulation with operational space control barrier functions,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , IEEE, 2025, pp. 187–194. [18] R. Sambharya and B. Stellato, “Learning algorithm hyperparameters for fast parametric convex optimiza-tion,” SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science ,vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 649–676, 2026. [19] I. Markovsky and F. D¨ orfler, “Behavioral systems theory in data-driven analysis, signal processing, and control,” Annual Reviews in Control , vol. 52, pp. 42– 64, 2021. [20] A. Agrawal, S. Barratt, S. Boyd, E. Busseti, and W. M. Moursi, “Differentiating through a cone program,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09043 , 2019. [21] B. Amos, “Differentiable optimization-based model-ing for machine learning,” 2019. [22] A. Megretski, 6.245: Multivariable control systems by ,2000. [23] T. Basar, “A dynamic games approach to controller design: Disturbance rejection in discrete time,” in 

Proceedings of the 28th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, , IEEE, 1989, pp. 407–414. [24] S. G. Dietz, “Analysis and control of uncertain systems by using robust semi-definite programming,” Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands , 2008. [25] K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle, K. Glover, et al., Robust and optimal control . Prentice hall New Jersey, 1996, vol. 40. [26] P. A. Guth and K. Kunisch, “Approximation of risk-averse optimal feedback control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15618 , 2025. [27] S. Boyd, L. El Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrish-nan, Linear matrix inequalities in system and control theory . SIAM, 1994. [28] J. C. Willems, P. Rapisarda, I. Markovsky, and B. L. De Moor, “A note on persistency of excitation,” Sys-tems & Control Letters , vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 325–329, 2005. [29] J. Coulson, J. Lygeros, and F. D¨ orfler, “Data-enabled predictive control: In the shallows of the deepc,” in 

2019 18th European control conference (ECC) , IEEE, 2019, pp. 307–312. [30] Y. Lian, R. Wang, and C. N. Jones, “Koopman based data-driven predictive control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05122 , 2021. [31] J. N¨ af, K. Moffat, J. Eising, and F. D¨ orfler, “Choose wisely: Data-driven predictive control for nonlinear systems using online data selection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18845 , 2025. [32] L. Huang, J. Lygeros, and F. D¨ orfler, “Robust and kernelized data-enabled predictive control for nonlin-ear systems,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 611–624, 2023. [33] T. A. Howell, C. Fu, and Z. Manchester, “Direct policy optimization using deterministic sampling and collocation,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , IEEE, 2021. [34] D. Luenberger, “Observers for multivariable systems,” 

IEEE transactions on automatic control , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 190–197, 1966. [35] G. Pannocchia, “Offset-free tracking mpc: A tutorial review and comparison of different formulations,” in 2015 European control conference (ECC) , IEEE, 2015, pp. 527–532. [36] E. Okyere, A. Bousbaine, G. T. Poyi, A. K. Joseph, and J. M. Andrade, “Lqr controller design for quad-rotor helicopters,” The Journal of Engineering ,vol. 2019, no. 17, pp. 4003–4007, 2019.