Title: Threat-guided Policy-aware Scene Perturbation for Safe Autonomous Driving with Online Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.10403v1

Published Time: Wed, 12 Aug 2026 00:29:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Threat-guided Policy-aware Scene Perturbation for Safe Autonomous Driving with Online Reinforcement Learning 

## Xincong Hu 1∗, Lei Ou 1∗, Maosen Li 2,Jingtao Zhang 2, Liguo Hou 2, Zongzhang Zhang 1†

> 1

Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 

> 2

Yinwang Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd., China 

Abstract 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promising perfor-mance in autonomous driving, yet ensuring the safety of on-line RL policies remains challenging due to insufficient expo-sure to safety-critical driving scenes. The long-tailed nature of real-world traffic situations makes dangerous and rare inter-actions difficult to encounter through conventional sampling, limiting the ability of RL policies to learn robust safety be-haviors. Existing methods improve training diversity by syn-thesizing challenging scenes or adversarial situations. How-ever, these approaches typically optimize scene generation objectives separately from the evolving policy, without ex-plicitly modeling how generated perturbations relate to the current policy’s weaknesses and learning needs. In this paper, we propose Threat-guided Policy-aware Scene Perturbation (TPSP) for safe autonomous driving with online RL. TPSP introduces a policy-aware scene encoder to capture the in-teraction between policy behaviors and surrounding environ-ments, enabling scene perturbation aligned with the current policy. Based on this representation, TPSP selectively perturbs critical objects rather than applying uniform modifications across the scene. Furthermore, we develop a threat-guided optimization strategy that evaluates perturbed scenes through threat-level differences between policy rollouts on original and perturbed scenes, guiding the generation of safety-critical scenes with higher training value. Comprehensive experi-ments demonstrate that TPSP improves safety learning ef-ficiency, achieving strong safety performance on NAVSIM v2 with approximately 4 million kilometers of simulated driv-ing data. Ablation studies verify that policy-aware targeted perturbations provide more informative safety-critical expe-riences than random or policy-unaware strategies, enabling safer driving under limited interaction budgets. 

## Introduction 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising ap-proach for autonomous driving by enabling policies to learn complex decision-making strategies through environment in-teraction (Kiran et al. 2022; Cusumano-Towner et al. 2025; Kazemkhani et al. 2025). Unlike rule-based systems relying on handcrafted objectives (Paden et al. 2016) and supervised approaches requiring expert demonstrations (Codevilla et al. 

> ∗

This work was done during the internship at Yinwang Intelli-gent Technology Co., Ltd. 

> †

Corresponding author: zzzhang@nju.edu.cn 

2018; Bansal, Krizhevsky, and Ogale 2019), RL can adapt driving behaviors through large-scale experience collection. However, achieving safe and robust driving remains chal-lenging due to the scarcity of safety-critical long-tail scenes, where rare events such as collisions provide insufficient train-ing signals for learning reliable safety behaviors. To improve the exposure of RL policies to challenging driving scenes, prior studies explore scene augmentation and perturbation strategies to enrich training experiences. Rep-resentative approaches, including prioritized replay (Schaul et al. 2016), curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009), and ad-versarial scene generation (Xu et al. 2022), focus on selecting informative samples or constructing failure-inducing scenes. However, existing methods typically characterize scene dif-ficulty based on environment-level objectives, such as colli-sion probability, adversarial objectives, or predefined safety violations (Ding et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2025). Consequently, the generated scenes are often independent of the evolving policy: a specific event, such as a cut-in or sudden braking, may be trivial for a ma-ture policy but challenging for an immature one. This lim-itation prevents existing difficulty-oriented strategies from effectively targeting the current policy weaknesses during online RL training. Motivated by this observation, we propose that an effec-tive scene perturbation should consider the current policy be-havior instead of relying on predefined scene modifications. Since different policies may fail under different traffic con-ditions, policy-agnostic perturbations often provide limited training benefits. Therefore, a more effective perturbation strategy should adapt to current policy characteristics and identify the safety-critical situations that are most relevant to its limitations. Based on this insight, we propose TPSP, a Threat-guided Policy-aware Scene Perturbation framework for safe autonomous driving with online RL. TPSP iden-tifies and perturbs policy-relevant challenging scenes, en-abling more effective safety-oriented policy optimization. As illustrated in Figure 1, TPSP consists of three key com-ponents: a policy-aware scene encoder, a targeted scene per-turbation module, and a threat-guided scene perturbation op-timization method. First, the policy-aware scene encoder in-tegrates ego states, surrounding objects, road context, scene risk information, and the current policy’s action distribution to construct a policy-aware scene representation. This rep-arXiv:2608.10403v1 [cs.AI] 11 Aug 2026 Ego Policy 

Policy-aware Scene Encoder 

Input     

> Ego Object Road Policy
> Policy-Aware Scene Representation 𝒉

Original Scene  Targeted Scene Perturbation     

> ᐃEgo Initial State ᐃObject Speed ᐃObject Spawn Time
> Speed ↑
> Speed ↓

Perturbed Scene   

> Original Rollout 𝝉 org

GPUDrive Simulator  Perturbed Rollout 𝝉 pe𝒓  

> Update Policy using Mixed Rollouts
> Compute Threat-Level Difference

# ∆𝝃  

> Update Scene Perturbation Network using ∆𝝃

Input 

> 𝒉

Threat-guided Optimization 

> Risk

…

> 𝒆 𝑖 obj , 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝐾

+

Ego Policy Figure 1: Overview of the proposed framework. resentation provides both scene-level and policy-level infor-mation for perturbation generation. With this representation, targeted scene perturbation selectively modifies critical ob-jects instead of applying uniform perturbations across the scene. Finally, TPSP evaluates perturbed scenes by comput-ing the threat-level differences between the policy rollouts on perturbed and original scenes. The resulting threat signal optimizes the scene perturbation network, guiding it toward discovering safety-critical scenes with higher training value for autonomous driving policy improvement. Extensive experiments on autonomous driving bench-marks demonstrate that TPSP improves safety learning ef-ficiency under limited online RL interaction budgets. With roughly 4 million kilometers of simulated driving data, TPSP effectively discovers policy-relevant safety-critical experi-ences and enhances policy robustness. On the NAVSIM v2 navhard_two_stage benchmark (Cao et al. 2025), TPSP achieves 99.8% NC and 99.6% TTC on Stage 1 and maintains strong performance in the more challenging Stage 2 setting with 96.7% NC and 94.6% TTC, outperforming pre-vious best results by 2.2% and 1.8%, respectively. These re-sults demonstrate that policy-aware exploration enables more efficient utilization of limited interaction data for learning safer driving behaviors. In this work, our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose TPSP, a novel threat-guided perturbation framework designed to generalize safety-critical scenes for safe autonomous driving. By targeting the current pol-icy, TPSP generates high-risk interaction cases to robustly train safe driving behaviors. 

• Within TPSP, we quantify the threat by comparing pre-and post-perturbation rollouts to identify high-risk sam-ples. The scene perturbation module is then trained with the objective of maximizing these threat scores. 

• Extensive experiments demonstrate that TPSP signif-icantly outperforms baseline methods in both driving safety and data efficiency, highlighting its effectiveness in training robust driving policies. 

## Related Work 

Reinforcement learning for autonomous driving. Re-inforcement learning (RL) has been widely studied for closed-loop autonomous driving, where policies are opti-mized through continuous interaction with dynamic envi-ronments. To support RL-based training, various simulation platforms have been developed to improve scene diversity, scalability, and realism. CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017) and SMARTS (Zhou et al. 2021) provide high-fidelity simu-lation and multi-agent interaction, while MetaDrive (Li et al. 2023) and GPUDrive (Kazemkhani et al. 2025) further en-hance scene generation and large-scale parallel experience collection. Recent works also explore more realistic and ef-fective RL training paradigms, such as 3DGS-based simula-tion in RAD (Gao et al. 2025) and aligned world models in Raw2Drive (Yang et al. 2025) for driving policy optimiza-tion. However, RL policies remain highly dependent on the quality and diversity of collected experiences, making rare and safety-critical driving scenes difficult to discover through conventional sampling. 

Safety-critical scene generation and perturbation. Ex-isting works improve the exposure of driving policies to challenging situations through safety-critical scene gener-ation. AdvSim (Wang et al. 2021) and KING (Hanselmann et al. 2022) optimize surrounding-agent behaviors to con-struct safety-critical interactions, while SafeBench (Xu et al. 2022) and CAT (Zhang et al. 2023) provide benchmarking and critical scene generation frameworks for robustness eval-uation. Recent approaches further explore learning-based scene construction, including feasibility-aware adversarial optimization (Chen et al. 2025), diffusion-based safety-critical synthesis (Xu et al. 2025), and collaborative ad-versarial scene evolution (Liu et al. 2026). However, these methods mainly optimize scene difficulty, failure likelihood, or adversarial object behaviors from environment-level ob-jectives, without explicitly considering the evolving policy and its specific learning needs. TPSP addresses this limita-tion by introducing policy-aware representations for targeted scene perturbation and optimizing perturbations with policy-relevant threat signals. 

Policy-aware reinforcement learning. Policy-aware lear-ning improves training efficiency by adapting experiences or interactions according to the current policy. Self-play methods such as AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2018) demonstrate the effectiveness of informative interaction generation, while several autonomous driving studies explore adaptive agent interactions and robust policy optimization (Dai et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2023; Cusumano-Towner et al. 2025). Recent RL driving frameworks such as CaRL (Jaeger et al. 2025) and adaptive curriculum learning (Abouelazm et al. 2025) fur-ther adjust training experiences based on policy capability. However, these methods focus mainly on policy optimization or experience scheduling, rather than constructing safety-critical scenes tailored to the weaknesses of current policy. In contrast, TPSP establishes a closed-loop policy-aware per-turbation process, where the policy guides scene perturbation to provide more valuable experiences for online RL training. 

## Problem Formulation 

We formulate closed-loop autonomous driving as a Markov decision process (MDP), M = ( S, A, P, R, γ ), where S, A,

P, R, and γ denote the state space, action space, transition function, reward function, and discount factor, respectively. At timestep t, the driving policy πθ (at|st) maps the current state st ∈ S to an action at ∈ A . The state contains observ-able information of the ego vehicle, surrounding objects, and driving environment. A driving policy rollout is represented as 

τ = ( s0, a 0, r 0, . . . , s T ), (1) where rt ∈ R is the reward received at timestep t and T

represents the rollout horizon. To generate policy-relevant safety-critical scenes, we in-troduce a scene perturbation network Gϕ parameterized by ϕ.Given a policy-aware scene representation, Gϕ predicts per-turbations including object speed adjustment, object spawn time shift, and ego initial state modification. The objective of TPSP is to optimize Gϕ to discover safety-critical scenes with higher training value for policy optimiza-tion. Specifically, TPSP updates Gϕ using the threat-level difference between policy rollouts on perturbed and original scenes as the optimization signal. 

## Method 

The proposed TPSP framework consists of a driving policy 

πθ and a scene perturbation network Gϕ. Given policy-aware scene representations, Gϕ generates targeted scene perturba-tions, which are used to collect rollouts for policy optimiza-tion. The perturbations are optimized through policy-relevant threat signals derived from the comparison between policy rollouts on perturbed and original scenes, forming a closed-loop process that enables efficient learning of robust safety behaviors. 

Policy-aware Scene Encoder 

The effectiveness of scene perturbation depends not only on the traffic situations, but also on how the current policy inter-acts with the scene. Therefore, TPSP learns a policy-aware scene representation that integrates traffic configuration in-formation and policy characteristics, enabling the scene per-turbation network to generate perturbations aligned with the current policy. Given a scene state st, TPSP extracts het-erogeneous features from the scene, including ego feature, surrounding object features, road feature, risk-related feature and policy feature conditioned on st.The ego feature eego encodes the current kinematic state of the ego vehicle, including velocity, heading, and destina-tion information. For the i-th surrounding object, we define its feature representation as eobj  

> i

, i = 1 , . . . , N , where N de-notes the number of observable objects. Each object feature contains intrinsic attributes, such as object type and geomet-ric properties, as well as interaction-related information with the ego vehicle, including relative position, relative veloc-ity, and Time-to-Collision (TTC). These interaction features characterize the dynamic relationship between the ego vehi-cle and surrounding objects. Moreover, the road feature eroad encodes the information of the surrounding road structure, providing static environ-mental context for scene representation. In addition, TPSP incorporates a scene-level risk-related feature erisk to provide complementary safety information. This feature aggregates several safety-related indicators, including the inverse mini-mum distance to surrounding objects, the inverse minimum TTC, and the number of surrounding objects in the scene. To capture the characteristics of the current driving policy, TPSP extracts a policy feature from the hidden representa-tion of the frozen policy network. Specifically, let π¯θ denote a frozen copy of the current driving policy during rollout collection, where ¯θ represents the fixed policy parameters. Given the original scene observation before perturbation, the hidden representation extracted from π¯θ is denoted as zπ¯θ .The policy feature is obtained through a projection network: 

epolicy = MLP policy  zπ¯θ

 , (2) where MLP policy (·) denotes the policy projection network that maps the hidden policy representation into the extracted policy feature epolicy . The fixed policy parameters ¯θ prevent gradients from propagating into the driving policy during scene perturbation network optimization. This design allows the scene perturbation network to leverage the policy rep-resentation as auxiliary information while keeping policy optimization decoupled. These extracted features are then fed into the policy-aware scene encoder: (eego , eobj  

> i

, eroad , erisk , epolicy ). To model the interaction between the ego vehicle and surrounding ob-jects, TPSP employs an attention module to aggregate object information conditioned on the ego vehicle: 

cobj = Attention 



eego , {eobj  

> i

}Ni=1 



, (3) with cobj denoting the aggregated object interaction features and invalid objects masked before attention normalization. The ego feature serves as the query, while surrounding object features provide the interaction information to be aggregated. Finally, the complete policy-aware scene representation is obtained by fusing all feature components: 

h = MLP fusion  [eego , cobj , eroad , erisk , epolicy ] , (4) where MLP fusion (·) represents the feature fusion network that combines heterogeneous scene and policy feature into the final policy-aware scene representation h. Thus, h cap-tures both the physical interaction context of the scene and the characteristics of the current driving policy. This repre-sentation is then used by the subsequent scene perturbation network to generate policy-aware scene perturbations. 

Targeted Scene Perturbation 

Given the policy-aware scene representation h, TPSP gen-erates targeted scene perturbations by first selecting critical objects and then modifying the corresponding scene ele-ments. Instead of applying uniform perturbations to all ob-jects, TPSP focuses on objects that are more relevant to the current policy behavior. To identify important perturbation targets, TPSP assigns each observable object an importance score. This is achieved by applying a Softmax function over all objects in the scene, which normalizes the raw scoring logits into a probability distribution over the object set. Formally, the importance weight for each object is computed as: 

wobj = Softmax 

n

f score ([ eobj  

> i

, h]) 

oNi=1 



, (5) where wobj denotes the normalized importance scores of observable objects, N is the number of objects in the scene, and f score (·) is an object scoring network that maps each object-scene representation into an importance logit. Based on these scores, TPSP selects the top-K objects as perturba-tion targets, whose representations are denoted as: 

Eobj  

> K

= {eobj 1 , eobj 2 , . . . , eobj  

> K

}. (6) The selected top-K object representations are then com-bined with the policy-aware scene representation h and pro-vided to the scene perturbation network Gϕ. Instead of di-rectly generating deterministic modifications, Gϕ models a Gaussian perturbation distribution and samples raw pertur-bation variables from this distribution. Specifically, the perturbation network predicts the mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution: 

μ = gμ([ Eobj  

> K

, h]) , (7) 

σ = exp 



gσ ([ Eobj  

> K

, h]) 



, (8) 

zraw ∼ N  μ, diag( σ2) , (9) where gμ(·) and gσ (·) denote the mean and standard devia-tion prediction heads of Gϕ, respectively, with exponential function ensuring all standard deviation values positive. μ

and σ represent the predicted mean and standard deviation of the perturbation distribution, and zraw denotes the sampled unconstrained perturbation variables. The diagonal covari-ance matrix diag( σ2) assumes independent sampling across perturbation dimensions. TPSP then converts the raw perturbation variables into boundary indicators of the final state perturbation, 

z = λ (zmax ⊙ tanh( zraw )) , (10) where zmax specifies the maximum magnitude of each per-turbation variable, and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplica-tion. λ is a dynamically adjusted scaling factor controlling the overall perturbation strength during training. This transfor-mation converts unconstrained Gaussian samples into physi-cally feasible perturbations while preserving differentiability. The final perturbation variables z correspond to three types of scene modifications in TPSP: object speed adjust-ment, object spawn time shift, and ego initial state modifica-tion. Object-related perturbations are generated mainly based on the selected object representations, while ego initial state modification is conditioned on the policy-aware scene rep-resentation h, which captures the current policy’s response to the scene, including predicted trajectory distribution or action-value estimates. By integrating object-level and ego-level adjustments in this manner, TPSP generates targeted perturbations rather than fixed or uniform modifications. 

Threat-guided Scene Perturbation Optimization 

At the beginning of each training iteration, TPSP enriches the training scene set with informative safety-critical experi-ences to improve policy robustness. Since the original scene dataset D may contain insufficient high-risk interactions, TPSP maintains a scene buffer B to store previously dis-covered high-threat perturbed scenes. The original and per-turbed scenes are combined to construct the training dataset 

Dtrain , where their sampling proportions are dynamically adjusted throughout training. Specifically, the proportion of high-threat perturbed scenes is gradually increased during training, allowing the policy to progressively adapt to more challenging safety-critical situations. Given any scene sampled from D or B, the policy model performs rollouts based on the current state. Each rollout is subsequently evaluated from multiple perspectives regarding environmental traffic threats. To evaluate the threat score of a rollout τ , TPSP first computes a step-level threat score: 

ct = wttc cttc  

> t

+ wdist cdist  

> t

+ wedge cedge 

> t

+ wcol ccol  

> t

+ woff coff  

> t

, (11) where ct ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the threat score at timestep t.The five components represent different safety-related fac-tors, including time-to-collision, inter-object distance, road-edge proximity, collision occurrence, and off-road status. The coefficients wttc , wdist , wedge , wcol , and woff are weighting factors that balance different threat components. Since safety risks are usually concentrated in a small number of critical moments during a rollout, TPSP sum-marizes the overall rollout criticality by aggregating the most threatening timesteps. Given a rollout trajectory τ =(s0, a 0, r 0, . . . , s T ) with rollout horizon T , we select the top-k timesteps with the highest step-level threat scores and compute the rollout-level criticality as: 

C(τ ) = 1

k′

X

> t∈Top( τ,k )

ct, k′ = min( k, T + 1) , (12) where Top( τ, k ) retrieves the temporal indices of the top-k

selected critical timesteps with the highest ct values. Since a Algorithm 1 TPSP  

> 1:

Initialize driving policy πθ , scene perturbation network 

Gϕ, original dataset D, scene buffer B and perturbation scale λ 

> 2:

Set rollout policy π¯θ ← πθ 

> 3:

for each on-policy training iteration n do  

> 4:

Sample scenes from the combination of the original scene dataset D and the perturbed scene buffer B. 

> 5:

Extract detached policy feature from the sampled scenes using the rollout policy π¯θ 

> 6:

Construct policy-aware scene representations and generate targeted scene perturbations with Gϕ 

> 7:

Simulate perturbed scenes with π¯θ and collect on-policy rollouts  

> 8:

Update πθ using the collected perturbed-scene roll-outs with the selected on-policy RL algorithm  

> 9:

if scene perturbation network update then  

> 10:

Simulate the same sampled original scenes without perturbations using identical simulator seeds  

> 11:

Compute threat differences using Eq. (15)  

> 12:

Update Gϕ by minimizing Lper in Eq. (18)  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

Update B with high-threat perturbed scenes  

> 15:

Adjust λ according to the perturbation schedule  

> 16:

Synchronize the rollout policy: π¯θ ← πθ 

> 17:

end for 

rollout of horizon T contains T +1 states, k′ adjusts the num-ber of selected timesteps when the rollout length is shorter than k. By focusing on the most threatening moments rather than averaging all timesteps, C(τ ) better captures the safety-critical characteristics of a rollout. In addition to the overall threat magnitude, TPSP considers the temporal instability of threat evolution during the rollout. While C(τ ) captures critical risk levels, it does not reflect how rapidly the threat changes over time. Therefore, TPSP introduces the threat instability metric: 

V(τ ) = 1

T 

> T−1

X

> t=0

|ct+1 − ct|, (13) where V(τ ) measures the temporal instability of the threat evolution over the rollout. A larger value indicates that the safety condition changes more rapidly, suggesting a more challenging interaction for the driving policy. Based on both threat severity and threat instability, the final threat score of a rollout is defined as: 

ξ(τ ) = C(τ ) 1 + βV(τ )1 + β , (14) where β controls the contribution of threat variation. The criticality term C(τ ) dominates the threat estimation to pri-oritize genuinely safety-critical scenes, while V(τ ) acts as a modulation factor to emphasize temporally unstable interac-tions. This formulation enables TPSP to identify informative safety-critical scenes for policy improvement. To optimize the scene perturbation network, TPSP com-pares the threat scores between policy rollouts on perturbed Frozen Rollout          

> Policy 𝜋 ഥ𝜃
> Scene Perturbation
> Network 𝑮 𝜙
> Original Rollout 𝝉 org Perturbed Rollout 𝝉 per
> Policy -aware Representation
> Driving Policy 𝜋 𝜃
> PPO Update
> Perturbed Scene Original Scene
> 𝜋 ഥ𝜃 𝜋 ഥ𝜃
> Update 𝑮 𝜙
> With Threat
> Signal ∆𝝃

Figure 2: Closed-loop optimization between the driving pol-icy and scene perturbation network in TPSP. and original scenes from the same initial current state. Specif-ically, both rollouts are generated using the same fixed driv-ing policy π¯θ and identical simulator seeds: 

∆ξ = ξ(τ per ) − ξ(τ org ), (15) where τ per and τ org denote the perturbed and original roll-outs of the same initial state, respectively. The threat differ-ence ∆ξ measures the additional safety difficulty introduced by the generated perturbation. The perturbation network Gϕ is optimized using the threat difference as the learning signal. Based on one certain initial scene or state s ∈ S , for a sampled perturbation vector zraw  

> s

,its log probability is defined as: 

log pϕ(zraw  

> s

|Eobj  

> K

, h). (16) The threat differences are normalized within each pertur-bation update batch to reduce the scale variation across train-ing iterations. The normalized threat advantage for scene s

is computed as: 

ˆAs = ∆ξs − mean(∆ ξ)std(∆ ξ) + ϵ , (17) where ˆAs denotes the normalized threat advantage of scene 

s. The operators mean( ·) and std( ·) compute the mean and standard deviation of the threat differences over the current perturbation update batch, respectively, and ϵ is a small con-stant for numerical stability. Thus, the scene perturbation network is optimized with: 

Lper = −Es[ ˆAs log pϕ(zraw  

> s

|Eobj  

> K

, h)] − cent Hz , (18) where cent is the entropy regularization coefficient and Hz

denotes the entropy of the perturbation distribution. The en-tropy regularization encourages exploration of the perturba-tion space and prevents premature convergence. Algorithm 1 and Figure 2 illustrate the overall closed-loop optimization procedure of TPSP. During training, the generated perturbed scenes are used to collect rollouts for updating the driving policy πθ . Meanwhile, the threat dif-ference between perturbed and original rollouts provides the 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0           

> Simulated Driving Mileage (x10 6km)
> −0.5 −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1
> Reward
> Collision
> TPSP Vanilla PPO 00.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
> Simulated Driving Mileage (x10 6km)
> −0.40 −0.35 −0.30 −0.25 −0.20 −0.15 −0.10
> Reward
> Off-road
> TPSP Vanilla PPO

Figure 3: Safety learning reward curves during online RL training. Here, collision reward penalizes vehicle collision events, while off-road reward penalizes curb collisions. TPSP achieves faster improvements in collision avoidance and off-road safety with fewer simulated driving mileage. 

Scene A Scene B simulated ego simulated ego simulated ego simulated ego 

Vanilla PPO TPSP Vanilla PPO TPSP 

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on two representative safety-critical NAVSIM v2 scenes. TPSP enables earlier hazard response and safer trajectory generation compared with Vanilla PPO. optimization signal for updating the scene perturbation net-work Gϕ. By iteratively improving the driving policy based on informative perturbed scenes with PPO (Schulman et al. 2017) algorithm and refining Gϕ with threat-guided signals, TPSP establishes a closed-loop optimization process for dis-covering safety-critical training scenes. 

## Experiments 

Our experiments assess TPSP’s safety and efficiency from three perspectives: learning speed, perturbation efficacy, and final performance. We first determine if TPSP improves safety behaviors faster under fixed interaction budgets. Next, ablation studies isolate the impact of targeted perturbations and policy-aware representations. We then compare TPSP’s final policy against baselines on the NAVSIM v2 benchmark. Qualitative results further illustrate that TPSP effectively op-timizes scene perturbations using threat signals from policy rollouts to generate informative safety-critical interactions. 

Experimental Setup 

We train TPSP using the GPUDrive simulator with PPO and the NAVSIM v2 navtrain dataset. The resulting driv-ing policies are evaluated on the challenging NAVSIM v2 

navhard_two_stage benchmark. The evaluation con-siders three safety-related metrics: no at-fault collisions (NC), drivable area compliance (DAC), and time to collision (TTC). During training, all methods share the same policy architecture, reward function, interaction budgets, and PPO optimization hyperparameters to ensure a fair comparison. Further implementation details are provided in Appendix A. 

Safety Learning Efficiency Analysis 

Figure 3 illustrates the evolution of safety-related rewards during online RL training under the same interaction bud-gets. TPSP achieves faster improvements in both collision avoidance and off-road safety rewards compared with Vanilla PPO, indicating that the policy can acquire safety-related be-haviors more efficiently with fewer simulated driving miles. For example, at 2M miles, TPSP already reaches a collision-reward level that Vanilla PPO does not attain until 4M miles. This improvement comes from the targeted exposure to infor-mative safety-critical interactions, which provides more ef-fective training signals than uniformly sampled experiences. To further analyze the learned safety behaviors, Figure 4 presents two safety-critical scenarios from NAVSIM v2 to analyze learned safety behaviors. Under identical initial con-ditions, TPSP produces safer trajectories with earlier hazard responses. In Scene A, TPSP proactively avoids a collision by adjusting its trajectory, while Vanilla PPO fails to react and crashes. In Scene B, TPSP handles abrupt braking by de-celerating and keeping a safe distance, whereas Vanilla PPO responds too late. These cases highlight TPSP’s ability to im-prove safety learning efficiency by focusing on challenging interactions relevant to the policy’s weaknesses. Table 1: Ablation on NAVSIM v2 navhard_two_stage .                                   

> Method NC ↑DAC ↑TTC ↑
> S1 S2 S1 S2 S1 S2 Vanilla PPO 96.2 85.7 92.4 81.0 96.0 82.4 Random Perturbation 97.1 83.2 94.4 83.8 96.8 80.3 TPSP w/o PA 98.8 91.1 97.5 90.4 98.8 89.7
> TPSP 99.8 96.7 97.8 93.7 99.6 94.6

Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation studies to analyze the contribution of different components in TPSP. We compare Vanilla PPO, random perturbation, TPSP without policy awareness (TPSP w/o PA), and the full TPSP framework with policy-aware tar-geted perturbation. Table 1 reports the safety performance on the NAVSIM v2 navhard_two_stage benchmark. Here, S1 and S2 denote Stage 1 and Stage 2 evaluations, respec-tively, where Stage 1 evaluates policies on original scenes and Stage 2 focuses on more challenging synthesized scenarios. The upward arrows indicate that higher values correspond to better performance for the corresponding safety metrics. TPSP achieves the best performance across both stages, particularly in the more challenging S2 setting, where it obtains 96.7% NC and 94.6% TTC. Random perturbation provides only limited improvements over Vanilla PPO, in-dicating that increasing scene diversity alone is insufficient for effective safety learning. Moreover, the performance gap between TPSP and TPSP w/o PA demonstrates that incorpo-rating policy-specific information is essential for generating more informative safety-critical scenes. 

Safety Evaluation on NAVSIM v2 

We show the safety of TPSP by comparing it with state-of-the-art methods on the NAVSIM v2 leaderboard (Table 2). TPSP achieves superior performance in NC and TTC metrics across both evaluation stages, highlighting its effectiveness in collision avoidance and interaction safety. Further details on the baseline methods are available in Appendix B. Table 2: Safety on NAVSIM v2 navhard_two_stage .External results are reported from the NAVSIM v2 bench-mark leaderboard for reference. (Cao et al. 2025)                                                 

> Method NC ↑DAC ↑TTC ↑
> S1 S2 S1 S2 S1 S2 NavFormer 96.2 85.7 92.4 81.0 96.0 82.4 RAP 97.1 83.2 94.4 83.8 96.8 80.3 ZTRS 98.8 91.1 97.5 90.4 98.8 89.7 SimScale 99.5 94.5 99.1 94.2 99.5 92.8 DrivoR 99.1 92.3 98.2 91.6 98.6 90.5
> TPSP 99.8 96.7 97.8 93.7 99.6 94.6 = + 0.1115 =0.0540

Figure 5: Visualization of threat-guided policy-aware pertur-bations learned by TPSP in GPUDrive simulation. Left: a cut-in situation; Right: a car-following situation. TPSP evaluates how different perturbations affect policy-rollout threat sig-nals and optimizes scene perturbations toward safety-critical interactions. 

Qualitative Analysis 

Figure 5 visualizes the learned perturbations generated by TPSP in GPUDrive simulation. In the cut-in situation (left), the generated perturbation increases the threat of the inter-action with ∆ξ = +0 .1115 , corresponding to a more dan-gerous merging conflict. In contrast, the car-following situa-tion (right) exhibits a less hazardous interaction pattern, and the estimated threat variation ∆ξ = −0.0540 is consistent with this intuitive observation. These examples demonstrate that TPSP can effectively evaluate the risk variation induced by different perturbations and optimize scene modifications toward more informative safety-critical interactions, rather than blindly increasing scene complexity. 

## Conclusion and Future Work 

We proposed TPSP, a Threat-guided Policy-aware Scene Per-turbation framework for improving safety learning efficiency in online RL for autonomous driving. By generating targeted perturbations guided by policy weaknesses, TPSP enables more informative exploration under limited training budgets. Experiments on NAVSIM v2 demonstrate that TPSP achieves strong safety performance with approximately 4 million kilo-meters of simulated driving mileage. Ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of policy-aware targeted perturba-tions. Future work will explore more comprehensive pertur-bation spaces beyond the current scene-level modifications, including richer semantic, map-level, and multi-agent inter-action perturbations. We also plan to investigate TPSP in larger-scale simulation environments and real-world driving settings, as well as its integration with more diverse RL al-gorithms and autonomous driving policy architectures. References 

Abouelazm, A.; et al. 2025. Automatic Curriculum Learning for Driving Scenarios: Towards Robust and Efficient Rein-forcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 36th IEEE Intel-ligent Vehicles Symposium , 2333–2340. Bansal, M.; Krizhevsky, A.; and Ogale, A. S. 2019. Chauf-feurNet: Learning to Drive by Imitating the Best and Syn-thesizing the Worst. In Proceedings of the 15th Robotics: Science and Systems .Bengio, Y.; Louradour, J.; Collobert, R.; and Weston, J. 2009. Curriculum Learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning , 41–48. Cao, W.; Hallgarten, M.; Li, T.; Dauner, D.; Gu, X.; Wang, C.; Miron, Y.; Aiello, M.; Li, H.; Gilitschenski, I.; Ivanovic, B.; Pavone, M.; Geiger, A.; and Chitta, K. 2025. Pseudo-Simulation for Autonomous Driving. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Robot Learning , 4709–4722. Cao, Z.; Jiang, K.; Zhou, W.; Xu, S.; Peng, H.; and Yang, D. 2023. Continuous Improvement of Self-driving Cars Using Dynamic Confidence-aware Reinforcement Learning. Na-ture Machine Intelligence , 5(2): 145–158. Chen, K.; Lei, Y.; Cheng, H.; Wu, H.; Sun, W.; and Zheng, S. 2025. FREA: Feasibility-Guided Generation of Safety-Critical Scenarios with Reasonable Adversariality. In Pro-ceedings of the 8th Conference on Robot Learning , 566–586. Codevilla, F.; Miura, J.; Lopez, A. M.; Koltun, V.; Doso-vitskiy, A.; and Urtasun, R. 2018. End-to-end Driving via Conditional Imitation Learning. In Proceedings of the 35th IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ,1–9. Cusumano-Towner, M. F.; Hafner, D.; Hertzberg, A.; Huval, B.; Petrenko, A.; Vinitsky, E.; Wijmans, E.; Killian, T. W.; Bowers, S.; Sener, O.; Kraehenbuehl, P.; and Koltun, V. 2025. Robust Autonomy Emerges from Self-Play. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning ,11710–11737. Dai, Z.; Zhou, T.; Shao, K.; Mguni, D. H.; Wang, B.; and Hao, J. 2023. Socially-Attentive Policy Optimization in Multi-Agent Self-Driving System. In Proceedings of the 6th Con-ference on Robot Learning , 946–955. Ding, W.; Chen, B.; Xu, M.; and Zhao, D. 2020. Learning to Collide: An Adaptive Safety-Critical Scenarios Generating Method. In Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2243–2250. Dosovitskiy, A.; Ros, G.; Codevilla, F.; Lopez, A.; and Koltun, V. 2017. CARLA: An Open Urban Driving Simula-tor. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 1–16. Feng, L.; Gao, Y.; Zablocki, É.; Li, Q.; Li, W.; Liu, S.; Cord, M.; and Alahi, A. 2026. RAP: 3D Rasterization Augmented End-to-End Planning. In Proceedings of the 14th Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Gao, H.; Chen, S.; Jiang, B.; Liao, B.; Shi, Y.; Guo, X.; Pu, Y.; Yin, H.; Li, X.; Zhang, X.; et al. 2025. Rad: Training an End-to-End Driving Policy via Large-Scale 3DGS-based Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13144 .Hanselmann, N.; Renz, K.; Chitta, K.; Bhattacharyya, A.; and Geiger, A. 2022. KING: Generating Safety-Critical Driving Scenarios for Robust Imitation via Kinematics Gradients. In 

Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on Computer Vision , 335–352. Jaeger, B.; Dauner, D.; Beißwenger, J.; Gerstenecker, S.; Chitta, K.; and Geiger, A. 2025. CaRL: Learning Scal-able Planning Policies with Simple Rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17838 .Kazemkhani, S.; Pandya, A.; Cornelisse, D.; Shacklett, B.; and Vinitsky, E. 2025. GPUDrive: Data-Driven, Multi-Agent Driving Simulation at 1 Million FPS. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations .Kiran, B. R.; Sobh, I.; Talpaert, V.; Mannion, P.; Al Sallab, A. A.; Yogamani, S.; and Perez, P. 2022. Deep Reinforce-ment Learning for Autonomous Driving: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 23(6): 4909–4926. Kirby, E.; Boulch, A.; Xu, Y.; Yin, Y.; Puy, G.; Zablocki, É.; Bursuc, A.; Gidaris, S.; Marlet, R.; Bartoccioni, F.; Cao, A.-Q.; Samet, N.; Vu, T.-H.; and Cord, M. 2026. Driving on Registers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05083 .Li, Q.; Peng, Z.; Feng, L.; Zhang, Q.; Xue, Z.; and Zhou, B. 2023. MetaDrive: Composing Diverse Driving Scenarios for Generalizable Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(3): 3461– 3475. Li, Z.; Yao, W.; Wang, Z.; Sun, X.; Chen, J.; Chang, N.; Shen, M.; Song, J.; Wu, Z.; Lan, S.; and Alvarez, J. M. 2025. ZTRS: Zero-Imitation End-to-end Autonomous Driving with Trajectory Scoring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24108 .Liu, J.; Guo, Y.; Zhong, F.; Zhang, T.; Jing, Z.; Liang, S.; Wang, J.; Zhang, M.; Liu, A.; and Liu, X. 2026. Adver-sarial Generation and Collaborative Evolution of Safety-Critical Scenarios for Autonomous Vehicles. In Proceed-ings of the 40th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,38926–38934. Paden, B.; Cap, M.; Yong, S. Z.; Yershov, D.; and Frazzoli, E. 2016. A Survey of Motion Planning and Control Tech-niques for Self-driving Urban Vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 1(1): 33–55. Schaul, T.; Quan, J.; Antonoglou, I.; and Silver, D. 2016. Prioritized Experience Replay. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning Representation .Schulman, J.; Wolski, F.; Dhariwal, P.; Radford, A.; and Klimov, O. 2017. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Lai, M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; Sifre, L.; Kumaran, D.; Graepel, T.; et al. 2018. Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play with a General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815 .Tian, H.; Li, T.; Liu, H.; Yang, J.; Qiu, Y.; Li, G.; Wang, J.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, L.; Ye, H.; Chen, L.; and Li, H. 2026. SimScale: Learning to Drive via Real-World Simulation at Scale. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,36365–36374. Wang, J.; Pun, A.; Tu, J.; Manivasagam, S.; Sadat, A.; Casas, S.; Ren, M.; and Urtasun, R. 2021. AdvSim: Generating Safety-Critical Scenarios for Self-Driving Vehicles. In Pro-ceedings of the 38th IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 9909–9918. Xu, C.; Ding, W.; Lyu, W.; Liu, Z.; Wang, S.; He, Y.; Hu, H.; Zhao, D.; and Li, B. 2022. SafeBench: A Benchmark-ing Platform for Safety Evaluation of Autonomous Vehicles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 ,25667–25682. Xu, C.; Petiushko, A.; Zhao, D.; and Li, B. 2025. Diff-Scene: Diffusion-Based Safety-Critical Scenario Generation for Autonomous Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 8797–8805. Yang, Z.; Jia, X.; Li, Q.; Yang, X.; Yao, M.; and Yan, J. 2025. Raw2Drive: Reinforcement Learning with Aligned World Models for End-to-End Autonomous Driving (in CARLA v2). In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 .Zhang, L.; Peng, Z.; Li, Q.; and Zhou, B. 2023. CAT: Closed-Loop Adversarial Training for Safe End-to-End Driving. In 

Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Robot Learning , 2357– 2372. Zhou, M.; Luo, J.; Villella, J.; Yang, Y.; Rusu, D.; Miao, J.; Zhang, W.; Alban, M.; Fadakar, I.; Chen, Z.; Huang, C.; Wen, Y.; Hassanzadeh, K.; Graves, D.; Zhu, Z.; Ni, Y.; Nguyen, N.; Elsayed, M.; Ammar, H.; Cowen-Rivers, A.; Ahilan, S.; Tian, Z.; Palenicek, D.; Rezaee, K.; Yadmellat, P.; Shao, K.; Chen, D.; Zhang, B.; Zhang, H.; Hao, J.; Liu, W.; and Wang, J. 2021. SMARTS: An Open-Source Scalable Multi-Agent RL Training School for Autonomous Driving. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Robot Learning , 264–285. Appendix A. Implementation Details 

This section provides additional implementation details of TPSP, including training hyperparameters, training infras-tructure and safety-related reward implementation. These details are provided to facilitate the reproducibility of our experiments. 

Training Hyperparameters 

TPSP consists of a driving policy πθ optimized with PPO and a scene perturbation network Gϕ trained through threat-guided optimization. The main configurations of these com-ponents are summarized below. 

Driving Policy Configuration The driving policy πθ is op-timized using PPO in the GPUDrive environment. The main architecture and training configurations are summarized in Table 3. Table 3: Architecture configuration of the driving policy.         

> Hyperparameter Value Network architecture MLP-based actor network Hidden dimension 64 Latent policy dimension 64 Activation function tanh
> Action space Discrete Steering bins 13 Acceleration bins 7

Scene Perturbation Network Configuration The scene perturbation network Gϕ generates policy-aware scene mod-ifications based on encoded simulator states and detached policy features. The main configurations are summarized in Table 4. Table 4: Configuration of the scene perturbation network.                 

> Hyperparameter Value Encoder hidden dimension 128 Fusion dimension 256 Policy feature dimension 64 Number of selected objects K8Initial log standard deviation -1.0 Optimizer Adam Learning rate 1×10 −4
> Entropy coefficient 0.01 Gradient clipping 0.5 Update interval 4 rollouts Initial perturbation scale λ0.2

PPO Optimization Configuration The detailed PPO op-timization parameters used for updating the driving policy are summarized in Table 5. Table 5: PPO optimization configuration for training the driv-ing policy.                 

> Hyperparameter Value Optimizer AdamW Learning rate 3×10 −4
> PPO clip ratio 0.2 Number of PPO epochs 2Discount factor γ0.99 GAE coefficient λGAE 0.95 Experience batch size 204800 Mini-batch size 6400 Value loss coefficient 0.5 Entropy coefficient 0.01 Gradient clipping 0.5

Training Infrastructure 

All experiments are conducted on the GPUDrive simulation platform. The hardware and software configurations used for training are summarized in Table 6. Table 6: Training infrastructure configuration.          

> Configuration Specification GPU NVIDIA A100 Number of GPUs 16 Memory 1024GB Number of CPU Cores 128 Operating System Linux Deep learning framework PyTorch Simulation backend GPUDrive Parallel simulation environments 512

Safety-related Reward Implementation 

The driving policy is optimized using the reward provided by the GPUDrive simulator. This section describes the imple-mentation of two safety-related reward components: collision and off-road penalties. At each simulation step, GPUDrive provides safety event indicators for each agent. The collision signal combines collisions with vehicles and other objects: 

dcol  

> t

= dveh  

> t

+ dobj  

> t

, (19) where dveh  

> t

and dobj  

> t

denote collision events with vehicles and other objects at timestep t, respectively. The off-road signal doff  

> t

indicates whether the ego vehicle leaves the driv-able area. The corresponding safety-related reward terms are defined as: 

rsafe  

> t

= −3.5dcol  

> t

− 0.75 doff  

> t

+ 0 .5dgoal  

> t

, (20) where dgoal  

> t

denotes goal achievement. The larger collision penalty encourages the policy to prioritize collision avoid-ance, while the off-road penalty provides continuous guid-ance for maintaining valid driving areas. The collision penalty is applied only at the collision timestep since collided agents are removed by the simula-tor. In contrast, off-road penalties can accumulate when the vehicle remains outside the drivable area. Other shaping re-ward components provided by GPUDrive remain unchanged during training. Appendix B. Additional Discussion on NAVSIM Comparison and Training Pipeline 

This section further discusses the comparison between TPSP and existing NAVSIM v2 leaderboard methods, and describes the training pipeline used to enable online reinforcement learning with NAVSIM scenes. We clarify the differences in learning paradigms and input representations between TPSP and existing benchmark approaches. 

Comparison with NAVSIM v2 Leaderboard Methods 

Table 2 compares TPSP with representative methods re-ported on the official NAVSIM v2 leaderboard. These exter-nal results are included for reference under the same bench-mark evaluation protocol. Most existing NAVSIM leaderboard methods follow an offline data-driven end-to-end autonomous driving paradigm(Cao et al. 2025; Feng et al. 2026; Li et al. 2025; Tian et al. 2026; Kirby et al. 2026). They typically learn driv-ing policies or trajectory planners from large-scale recorded driving data, where raw sensor observations provided by NAVSIM, such as multi-view camera inputs, are directly used as model inputs. Therefore, these approaches generally adopt a one-stage learning pipeline that maps perception-level observations to future trajectories or driving actions. In contrast, TPSP is designed as an online reinforcement learning framework that improves policy learning through interactive simulation. Instead of directly consuming raw sensor observations, TPSP utilizes structured white-box in-formation available from the simulator, including ego states, surrounding object states, road information, and risk-related features. Based on these structured representations, TPSP first constructs a policy-aware scene representation and then performs online RL optimization with targeted scene pertur-bations. Therefore, TPSP differs from existing NAVSIM methods in both learning paradigm and system pipeline. Existing ap-proaches mainly improve driving performance by developing stronger perception and planning models from offline data, whereas TPSP focuses on improving the quality of online policy training experiences through simulator-based interac-tion. Despite these differences, TPSP achieves competitive performance on NAVSIM v2 safety evaluation, demonstrat-ing the effectiveness of online RL with policy-aware scene optimization. 

NAVSIM-to-GPUDrive Training Pipeline 

TPSP requires interactive simulation for online reinforce-ment learning, whereas NAVSIM v2 provides recorded driv-ing scenes for benchmark evaluation. Therefore, the original NAVSIM v2 scenes cannot be directly used for GPUDrive simulation and training. To enable online training, we transform NAVSIM v2 scenes into GPUDrive-compatible simulation environments. The conversion process preserves essential scene informa-tion, including map structures, dynamic agent states, and temporal interactions, while enabling large-scale parallel simulation in GPUDrive. After conversion, TPSP performs online reinforcement learning on the generated GPUDrive scenes. The learned policy is finally evaluated on the official NAVSIM v2 

navhard_two_stage benchmark following the standard evaluation protocol, allowing comparison with the publicly reported leaderboard results.